## FUBP1 is a general splicing factor facilitating 3 0 splice site recognition and splicing of long introns

## Graphical abstract

## Highlights

## Authors

## Correspondence

## In brief

Ebersberger et al. identify the RNAbinding protein FUBP1 as a key splicing factor that binds to a hitherto unknown cis -regulatory motif at 3 0 splice sites. Multivalent interactions of FUBP1 with splice site components support spliceosome assembly at multiple stages and ensure efficient splicing of long introns.

## SUMMARY

Splicing of pre-mRNAs critically contributes to gene regulation and proteome expansion in eukaryotes, but our understanding of the recognition and pairing of splice sites during spliceosome assembly lacks detail. Here, we identify the multidomain RNA-binding protein FUBP1 as a key splicing factor that binds to a hitherto unknown cisregulatory motif. By collecting NMR, structural, and in vivo interaction data, we demonstrate that FUBP1 stabilizes U2AF2 and SF1, key components at the 3 0 splice site, through multivalent binding interfaces located within its disordered regions. Transcriptional profiling and kinetic modeling reveal that FUBP1 is required for efficient splicing of long introns, which is impaired in cancer patients harboring FUBP1 mutations. Notably, FUBP1 interacts with numerous U1 snRNP-associated proteins, suggesting a unique role for FUBP1 in splice site bridging for long introns. We propose a compelling model for 3 0 splice site recognition of long introns, which represent 80% of all human introns.

## INTRODUCTION

Splicing is a crucial step in eukaryotic mRNA processing, and its dysregulation is a hallmark of many cancers. 1-3 Splicing is catalyzed by the spliceosome, a megadalton machinery comprising five small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) complexes named U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6. 4-7 During early spliceosome assembly (E complex formation), the 5 0 and 3 0 splice sites are recognized: U1 binds at the 5 0 splice site, whereas U2 auxiliary factor 1 (U2AF1), U2AF2, and splicing factor 1 (SF1) assemble at the 3 0 splice site, 6-11 where they specifically recognize AG dinucleo- tide, 12,13 polypyrimidine (Py) tract, 14-16 and branch point (BP) site, respectively (Figure 1A). 9,17 In the resulting A complex, U2 snRNP is recruited to the BP and stabilized by SF3A and SF3B, and SF1 is released. 18,19 Subsequent snRNP recruitment and further rearrangements (formation of B and C complexes) mediate intron excision and exon ligation to form the mature mRNA.

Strikingly, mechanistic details of splice site recognition by multidomain splicing factors during early spliceosome assembly are lacking. 20,21 U2AF2 binding is central to the early definition of splice sites and is subject to layers of regulation including direct competition, cooperative recruitment, change of RNA secondary structure, dynamic conformational states, and autoinhibition. 15,22-30 Despite the pivotal role of U2AF2, the precise contribution of cofactors and multivalent interactions are yet to be elucidated. Recently, we reported how U2AF2 achieves specificity despite the degeneracy of its pyrimidine-rich RNA-binding motif. 28 In this study, we found that the RNA-binding protein (RBP) far upstream binding protein 1 (FUBP1) promotes U2AF2 binding to RNA.

FUBP1wasinitially characterized as a transcriptional regulator of the proto-oncogene c -myc through binding to AT-rich DNA elements and interaction with PUF60, also known as the FUBP-interacting repressor (FIR). 31-34 However, more recently, FUBP1 has also been reported to bind RNA and to influence translation or splicing of specific transcripts. 35-38 Similar to its DNA-binding specificity, FUBP1 exhibits a general preference for AU- and GU-rich RNA 31 that is expected to derive from its four K homology (KH) domains. 39 Notably, cancer-associated loss-of-function mutations within FUBP1 have been connected to global splicing changes in low-grade glioma, 1,40-42 suggesting an RNA-regulatory role in these processes. Here, we reveal a global role for FUBP1 in pre-mRNA splicing. Our results suggest that FUBP1 functions as a general splicing factor at the 3 0 splice site, with a crucial role in promoting efficient splicing of long introns, which make up over 80% of human pre-mRNA transcripts.

## RESULTS

## FUBP1 is a core component of 3 0 splice site recognition

Todissect the role of FUBP1 in splicing, we examined the footprint of FUBP1 and other splicing factors on pre-mRNA in HeLa cells using in vivo individual-nucleotide resolution UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation ( in vivo iCLIP; Figures 1B and S1A; Table S1). 43,44 As expected, large proportions of the binding sites of SF1, U2AF2, and SF3B1 are located at 3 0 splice sites (10%, 17%, and 22%, respectively). Interestingly, FUBP1 shows a similar preference for 3 0 splice sites (19%). By contrast, for the more restricted splicing regulator PTBP1, which is known to act on a subset of exons, only 1% of binding sites are located at 3 0 splice sites. We confirmedthat U2AF2 binds atthe Pytractlocated betweentheBPand3 0 splice site, 45,46 whereasSF1bindingpeaks at the BP, with a reduced signal at the BP adenine itself, 9,17 presumably owing to the lower cross-linking efficiency of adenine (Figures 1C and 1D). 47 Consistent with a previous report, 48 SF3B1 binds in a clamp-wise manner up- and downstream of the BP. Strikingly, FUBP1 also shows a pronounced footprint at the BP (Figures 1C and 1D). Its binding peaks at a location 34 nucleotides (nt) upstream of the BP and tails for up to 100 nt. In comparison, PTBP1 does not display such a ubiquitous positioning at 3 0 splice sites (Figure 1C). 49,50 Next, weaddressedwhatfractionof 3 0 splice sites is bound using a saturation-based analysis that controls for splice site usage and transcript abundance. 51 We found that FUBP1 binds the same percentage of 3 0 splice sites as U2AF2 and SF3B1, which are both universally present at 3 0 splice sites (91.3%, 95.4%, and 99.6%, respectively; Figure 1E). By contrast, SF1 and PTBP1 are associated with 27.3% and 3.1% of 3 0 splice sites, respectively (Figures 1E and S1B). Overall, these data suggest that FUBP1 functions as a general splicing factor in early spliceosome assembly.

## FUBP1 binds a cis -regulatory RNA motif upstream of the branch point

phoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) with a 132-nt RNA fragment upstream of the prototypical 3 0 splice site of exon 43 of the VPS13D mRNA ( VPS13D ) and a shortened fragment (36 nt) with the region showing the most FUBP1 binding in iCLIP ( VPS13D short ; Figure 2A). We observed strong binding of FUBP1(FUBP1 N-box+KH , aa 1-457) to both RNAs in the low nanomolar range (Figures 2B, 2C, and S1C). Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) with VPS13D yielded a similar result (Figure 2D; Table S2), confirming the high-affinity binding at this region.

FUBP1 harbors four KH domains, which are expected to bind single-stranded RNA and DNA 32,52 and can act either independently or synergistically 53-55 to recognize extended regions of pre-mRNA. We used nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to investigate the modular arrangement of the four FUBP1 KH domains. Superimposition showed that the NMR spectrum of FUBP1 KH (aa 86-457) containing KH1-4 was virtually identical to those of the individual KH domains, indicating that the KH domains are structurally independent (Figure S1D). Furthermore, NMR secondary structure analysis revealed that FUBP1 contains KH domains with a typical type I fold that are connected by flexible linkers (Figure S1E). 56 We conclude that the KH domains of FUBP1 are not preformed into an RNA-binding platform but rather can be considered like beads on a string.

To characterize the individual RNA-binding preferences of the four KH domains, we performed a scaffold-independent analysis (SIA), which is based on changes in NMR chemical shifts upon titration with short oligonucleotide motifs (Figure S2A). 57 Initial binding experiments were performed using randomized pools of 5-mer DNA, followed by verification of the identified motifs using RNA oligonucleotides (Figure S2B). SIA identified welldefined consensus motifs for KH1 (UUUG) and KH2 (UUGU) and more loosely defined motifs for KH3 (YBKK, where Y = C or U; B = C, G, or U; K = G or U) and KH4 (YUKK). Hence, all four KH domains exhibit a preference for GU-rich sequences (Figure 2E). The affinities of the individual KH domains to the final motifs, as determined by NMR spectroscopy, are in the high micromolar range (Figures S2C-S2F). Combinations of two KH domains and motifs show strong binding avidity: the ITCmeasured affinities for tandem domains were in the high nanomolar to low micromolar range (Figures S2G-S2I; Table S2). This suggests that specificity and high affinity are achieved by avidity and multivalent interactions between the four KH domains and RNA with multiple binding motifs (Figure 2F). Indeed, EMSA and ITC experiments confirmed that multiple FUBP1 binding motifs in the VPS13D mRNA fragment increase FUBP1 binding to nanomolar affinity (Figures 2A, 2C, and 2D).

Interrupting the U-rich motifs of VPS13D short with cytidines severely reduces the binding affinity, underlining the specificity of the FUBP1-RNA interaction (Figure S1C).

To validate the interaction between FUBP1 and RNA motifs in cells, we compared 4-mer motifs in the sites of strongest FUBP1 binding over background in the in vivo iCLIP data. In line with the SIA, we found a strong preference for uridine-rich motifs at FUBP1 binding sites (Figures 2G and S2J). For in vivo binding, these motifs can be interspersed at any position by adenine or, to a lesser extent, by guanine. Consistent with the omnipresence of FUBP1 at 3 0 splice sites, we observed a striking enrichment of FUBP1 binding motifs (''UUU+A'' and ''UUU+G,'' i.e., three uridines interspersed at any position with adenine or guanine) upstream of the BP, where they coincide with FUBP1 binding (Figure 2H). Conversely, both ''UUU+C,'' accounting for general uridine richness, and random motif sets are enriched closer to the 3 0 splice site but not in the main region of FUBP1 binding. Importantly, enriched FUBP1 motifs upstream of the BP are a common feature across all annotated introns (Figures 2H, 2I, S2K, and S2L), indicating that we identified a previously unknown cis -regulatory RNA motif in splicing regulation.

## FUBP1 directly interacts with U2AF2 and SF1

Given the prevalence of FUBP1 at functional 3 0 splice sites, we examined whether FUBP1 interacts with key early 3 0 splice site components in cells using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) (Figure 3A). 58 Interaction signals in the BRET assay are indicative of direct contacts or close proximities. As a proof-of-concept, we confirmed the known U2AF2-SF1 interaction. 8,10,18,58 Importantly, we also observed interactions of FUBP1withU2AF2andSF1(Figures 3B, 3C, and S2M), suggesting that FUBP1 is in close or direct contact with these core splicing factors inside cells.

To investigate whether FUBP1 directly interacts with SF1 (Figure 3C), we focused on the C-terminal region of FUBP1, which harbors the A and B boxes (A/B boxes). These motifs are specific to the FUBP family of proteins and have been shown to mediate binding to a proline-rich region of snRNP-U1-70K in fruit flies. 60,59 Similar proline-rich regions are also present in the

C-terminal region of SF1. Consistently, the SF1-FUBP1 interaction detected by BRET is reduced upon deletion or mutation of the A/B boxes (Figures 3B -3DandS2M). In addition, 1 H- 15 Ncorrelation NMR spectra of the FUBP1 A/B box region show specific chemical shift perturbations (CSPs) upon titration with the proline-rich region of SF1, indicating direct binding (Figure 3E).

To map the interacting regions in FUBP1 and U2AF2, we performed NMR titration experiments using 15 N-labeled U2AF2 RRM12 14,15,30 and unlabeled full-length FUBP1. Large CSPs and line broadening in the 1 H- 15 N correlation spectra exclusively map to the U2AF2 RRM2 domain, especially to the two a helices on the backside of the b sheets that mediate RNA binding (Figures 3B, 3F, S2N, and S3A). Moreover, a construct comprising the N-terminal region of FUBP1 (FUBP1 N74 , aa 1-74) recapitulates the CSPs observed with fulllength FUBP1, whereas a construct lacking the N-terminal region (FUBP1 D N , aa 75-644) does not yield any evident CSPs (Figures 3F and S3A). Complementary NMR titrations with 15 Nlabeled FUBP1 constructs identify the U2AF2 RRM2 domain and a short peptide motif in the N-terminal region of FUBP1 (aa 27-52), referred to as N-box, as the minimal binding regions (Figures S3B -S3F). The U2AF2 RRM2-FUBP1 N-box interaction exhibits micromolar affinity by NMR titrations (Figures 3G, S3D, S3G, and S3H; Table S2).

To provide a high-resolution view, we determined the NMRderived solution structure of the U2AF2 RRM2-FUBP1 N-box complex (Figures 3H and S3I -S3K; Table 1). This structure shows a well-defined U2AF2 RRM2 domain and a more mobile helical FUBP1 N-box and reveals that the FUBP1 N-box forms an a helix, which is recognized by helices a 1 and a 2 and the b 4 strand of U2AF2 RRM2 . Hydrophobic interactions dominate at this interface, where four alanines in FUBP1 N-box (A30, A34, A38, and A42) are aligned along the extended hydrophobic interface, with A38 positioned centrally. Additional contacts involving bulkier side chains, that is, R37 and I41 in FUBP1 and L278 and M323 in U2AF2, further stabilize the binding interface. The recognition of the FUBP1 N-box resembles the interaction between FUBP1 N-box and PUF60, 34 consistent with structural similarities between PUF60 and U2AF2 RRM2 (Figure S4A). 34

Interestingly, both FUBP1 N-box-RRM interfaces show only limited interdigitation of the hydrophobic side chains, consistent with the modest binding affinity in the micromolar range.

In a recent survey of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), FUBP1 was noted for its particularly high rate of non-synonymousmutations in low-grade gliomas. 1 Tolearn about the mechanistic impact of such mutations, we systematically searched cancer mutation databases and identified 26 disease-related single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) within the FUBP1 N-box (Figure S4B). Five candidate mutations (A38D, A43E, K44R, I45F, and G47C) were selected by considering the magnitude of chemical shift changes occurring in the NMR titration of FUBP1 N-box with U2AF2 RRM2 (Figures S3B -S3D and S4B). In addition, we included L35V, which has been shown to weaken the FUBP1-PUF60 interaction. 61 NMR analysis revealed that A38D strongly impairs U2AF2 binding (Figures 3I and S4CS4G). This is consistent with our structure in which A38 forms the core of the hydrophobic binding interface between FUBP1 N-box and U2AF2. A bulkier negatively charged side chain in this position is expected to introduce steric and electrostatic repulsion at the binding interface. Residue A38 in FUBP1 was also required for binding to PUF60 in a mutational study, 61 whereas L35V, which also affected the FUBP1-PUF60 interaction in that study, did not impair the interaction of FUBP1 with

U2AF2 RRM2 (Figures S4C and S4D). A significant weakening of the U2AF2-FUBP1 interaction by A38D in the full-length context was also confirmed in cells using BRET (Figures 3C, 3J, and S2M). Here, some residual binding between FUBP1 A38D and U2AF2 was observed, probably because both proteins remain in proximity through binding to the same premRNAs. As expected, A38D does not affect FUBP1-SF1 binding, which occurs via the A/B boxes (Figures 3C, S4H, and S4I). In summary, our experiments demonstrate that FUBP1 interacts directly with U2AF2 and SF1 via its N-terminal N-box and C-terminal A/B boxes, respectively. The former interaction is severely impaired by a cancer-associated mutation in FUBP1.

## FUBP1 promotes U2AF2 binding to 3 0 splice sites

To investigate the impact of FUBP1 on E complex formation, we monitored U2AF2 binding to RNA using in vitro iCLIP. 28 To this end, we designed a pool of short RNA transcripts (182 nt) representing /C24 2,000 natural 3 0 splice sites from human transcripts, which we mixed with recombinant U2AF2 RRM12 (see STAR Methods). Remarkably, addition of recombinant full-length FUBP1 (FUBP1 FL ) results in stronger binding of U2AF2 RRM12 to virtually all 3 0 splice sites in the transcript pool (Figures 4A, 4B, and S5A -S5C; Table S1). The in vivo pattern of U2AF2 binding can thereby be reproduced in vitro in the presence of full-length FUBP1 (Figure 4C). The widespread effects are in contrast to those of our previous findings using in vitro -translated FUBP1, which affected only a few U2AF2 binding sites. 28 Hence, our updated experiments indicate that FUBP1 acts globally to stabilize U2AF2 binding. We find that this effect is dependent on FUBP1 concentration and is directly linked to the number of FUBP1 binding motifs upstream of the BP (Figure 4D). To confirm these findings in longer transcripts, we repeated the experiment with a pool of eight in vitro transcripts (2.0-5.7 kb; Figures S5D and S5E; Table S1). Indeed, addition of recombinant full-length FUBP1increases the strength of U2AF2 RRM12 binding at 3 0 splice sites (Figures 4E and S5F) and thereby reproduces the in vivo binding pattern of U2AF2 (Figure 4F). Notably, this effect is considerably reduced with FUBP1 D N (impaired U2AF2 interaction), and it is completely abolished with FUBP1 N74 (lacking KH domains). This highlights the importance of the N-box in FUBP1 for directly interacting with U2AF2 as well as of FUBP1's RNA binding for the stabilization of U2AF2 (Figures 4F and S5F). Together, this indicates that the interaction of FUBP1 with both pre-mRNA and U2AF2 globally promotes U2AF2 binding at the 3 0 splice site during early spliceosomal assembly.

## FUBP1 is critical for the splicing of long introns

To investigate the impact of FUBP1 on splicing, we generated a FUBP1 knockout (KO) RPE1 cell line using CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering (Figures 5A and S5G) and performed RNA-seq. MYC gene expression was unaltered, suggesting that it is not controlled by FUBP1 in RPE1 cells (Figure S5H). Next, we examined transcriptome-wide splicing and found 1,041 significant splicing changes, including 399 cassette exons (Figure 5B; Tables S1 and S3). Consistent with a role in splice site recognition, FUBP1 KOpreferentially leads to exon skipping (276 [69%] with delta percent spliced in [ D PSI] &lt; /C0 0.1).

A closer inspection revealed that the fate of an exon is related to the length of the flanking introns: decreased inclusion in FUBP1 KO cells is typically observed for exons that are flanked by longer introns, compared with exons with increased or unchanged inclusion (Figure 5B, top). Most affected exons are alternative exons, but we observed the same effect for regulated constitutive exons (Figure S5I). Importantly, the effect on long introns can be recapitulated in ENCODE 62,63 data on FUBP1 knockdown cells (Figure 5B, bottom). To test whether this depends on the interaction with U2AF2, we generated a FUBP1Nbox mut mutant with a targeted deletion of A38 and neighboring amino acids in the endogenous FUBP1 gene in RPE1 cells (Figures 5A and S5G). Although overall fewer cassette exons are regulated in this mutant (n = 81), exons are predominantly skipped (n = 45), and these are flanked by longer introns (Figure S5J). Together, these data reveal that FUBP1 is important for the splicing of long introns and suggest a functional role for the N-box in this process.

To investigate whether FUBP1 mutations in tumor cells affect splicing, we analyzed data from glioma patients. 1 Intriguingly, we found that skipped exons in patients with FUBP1 loss-of-function mutations have longer adjacent introns than exons dysregulated in patients harboring other splicing factor mutations (Figures 5C and S6A). The effect is also evident upon FUBP1 knockdown in the glioblastoma cell line U87MG from the same study (Figure 5C). Together, these data strongly suggest that FUBP1 plays a role in the efficient splicing of long introns, thereby affecting the inclusion of adjacent exons.

To validate the role of FUBP1 for long introns, we constructed a minigene for the alternative exon 18 in the MPDZ transcript, which is skipped upon FUBP1 KO in RPE1 cells. The minigene comprises the alternative exon with the flanking constitutive exons and intervening long introns (&gt;2.4 kb). In vivo iCLIP data show that FUBP1 binds at both 3 0 splice sites, which was confirmed in vitro by EMSA with FUBP1 N-box+KH (aa 1-457; Figures S6B and S6C). We observed a marked decrease of alternative exon inclusion from the MPDZ minigene in FUBP1 KO (16% inclusion) and an intermediate effect (25%) in FUBP1Nbox mut cells, compared with wild-type (WT) cells (31% inclusion; Figures 5D, S6B, and S6D). Upon mutation of the FUBP1

binding sites, the exon showed reduced inclusion (7%) and did not change in the FUBP1 KO. If the introns were shortened but the FUBP1 binding sites retained, the effect of FUBP1 KOormutation was reduced, albeit still present, consistent with the notion that the intron is still perceived as long due to the presence of FUBP1 binding site. By contrast, if the FUBP1 binding sites were also removed, exon inclusion no longer responded to FUBP1 KO or FUBP1-Nbox mut , highlighting that FUBP1 binding is specifically required for the long-intron variant.

Intriguingly, the changes at long introns are linked to FUBP1 binding. We found a substantial increase in FUBP1 binding at the 3 0 splice sites of longer introns, both in absolute terms and relative to other splicing factors (Figures 5E and 5F). Differential FUBP1 binding was not observed for other exon-intron-related features, such as splice site, Py tract, and BP strength (Figures S6E -S6H). Furthermore, longer introns exhibit a marked enrichment of FUBP1 motifs upstream of the BP (Figures 5G and 5H). By contrast, random motif occurrences or splice site strength are independent of intron length (Figures S6I and S6J). Moreover, long introns were previously observed to preferentially locate to the nuclear periphery and exhibit a differential GC content architecture. 64,65 Indeed, we found that the occurrence of FUBP1 binding motifs correlates with the GC content architecture (Figures S6K -S6M). Furthermore, FUBP1 binds stronger to introns located in the nuclear periphery (Figure S6N) and to splice sites of exons with differential GC content architecture (Figures S7A -S7C). Further analysis indicated that both intron length and differential GC content architecture affect FUBP1 binding (Figure S7D).

Although splicing is an ancient molecular mechanism, gene architecture and especially intron length are subject to substantial evolutionary change (Figure S7E). We hypothesized that FUBP1 is present throughout Eukaryota and that lineage-specific losses or modifications of FUBP1 are accompanied by changes in average intron length. Indeed, we find overall that FUBP1 is well conserved. Although losses do occur, they are mostly observed in taxa with short introns such as protozoa and fungi (Figures 5I and 5J). Species with FUBP1 consistently harbor more FUBP1 motifs at their 3 0 splice sites (Figure 5K). By contrast, U-rich motifs interspersed with C, which do not accumulate in the region of

FUBP1 binding (Figure 5G), are least enriched in species with FUBP1. Comparing FUBP1's domain architecture across eukaryotic evolution, we find that C-terminal A/B boxes are an animalspecific innovation. Their appearance in evolution is associated with an overall increase in intron length in animals compared with other eukaryotes (Figure 5I). Together, this suggests that FUBP1binding to its RNA motifs and its protein-protein interfaces play important roles in the splicing of long introns.

## FUBP1 interacts with both splice sites suggesting a function in cross-intron bridging

To decipher the molecular mechanism of FUBP1 action, we developed a kinetic model of cassette exon splicing using ordinary differential equations (Figures 6A and S7F; Table S4). In line with our previous work, 66 we considered a scenario for ''exon definition'' in which the U1 and U2 snRNPs recognize the 5 0 and 3 0 regions flanking an exon as functional units. The subsequent splice site pairing by U1/U2 snRNP interaction across the intron, that is, intron definition, triggers splicing catalysis, which results in either cassette exon inclusion, skipping, or intron retention in the model. We first simulated the loss of FUBP1 in a model in which FUBP1 solely acts on initial U1/U2 snRNP binding to exons (exon definition). However, our simulations argue against a pure exon definition effect, as the model cannot recapitulate the splicing changes that occur upon FUBP1 KO (Figure 6B; model 1). According to our experimental data, exons flanked by two long introns are typically skipped upon FUBP1 KO, whereas exons flanked by at least one short intron tend to show slightly increased inclusion. Surprisingly, the experimental data are more consistent with an alternative model in which FUBP1 enhances the pairing of splice sites across long (but not short) introns during intron definition. The model predicts reduced exon inclusion upon FUBP1 KO specifically for exons flanked by two long introns, whereas exons flanked by one short intron moderately increase, irrespective of whether it is located upstream or downstream (Figure 6B; model 2). These results also hold true in a modified model, in which exons are not defined as functional units, and intron splicing solely requires U1 and U2 binding to flanking splice sites (Figure S7G, ''intron definition model''). Taken together, the experimental observations are consistent with the kinetic model, which assumes that FUBP1 differentially affects long introns by promoting splice site pairing and the formation of catalytically active spliceosomes across long introns.

To test this prediction, we investigated the cross-linking of FUBP1 to snRNAs, indicative of its presence at different stages of splicing. First, FUBP1 showed substantial cross-linking to U2 snRNA, consistent with FUBP1 binding upstream of the BP where the U2 snRNP replaces SF1, indicating that FUBP1 is present during A-complex formation (Figure 6C). More importantly, FUBP1 alsocross-linkstoU1snRNA,whichbindstothe5 0 splicesite, suggesting that FUBP1 is present during the bridging of the 3 0 and 5 0 splice sites, either during initial exon definition or also at later stages of intron definition. The latter is further supported by the cross-linking of FUBP1 to U6 snRNA, which replaces U1 snRNA at the 5 0 splice site prior to lariat formation (Figure 6C). Hence, FUBP1mightbeinvolvedinintronbridgingthroughoutthesplicing cycle. We next searched our iCLIP datasets for evidence that FUBP1isstill bound in the spliceosomal C complex when the lariat has formed after the first splicing reaction. It has been shown that readsfromthelariattruncateatthepositionwherethe5 0 splice site is covalently linked to the BP and is detected as a single-nucleotide-wide peak at the 5 0 splice site (Figure 6D). 68,69 Indeed, we observed a strong peak in read truncations for FUBP1 at the 5 0 splice site, whereas there was almost no signal for the other splicing factors tested (Figure 6E). This suggests that FUBP1 is present from the early stages of spliceosome assembly until at least the first catalytic step of the splicing reaction.

To further investigate whether FUBP1 is actively involved in splice-site bridging, we searched available binary protein-protein interaction data from yeast two-hybrid screens. 67 These data confirmed that FUBP1 binds to U2AF2 (Figure 6F). We also found evidence for FUBP1 interacting with several U1-associated proteins (SNRPA, SNRPC, TIAL1, and PRPF40B) as well as with SNRPB, which is a member of the Sm protein ring in all snRNPs (Figure 6F). These and further interactions of FUBP1 with U1-associated proteins (TCERG1 and KHDRBS1) were confirmed using the BRET assay and/or NMR (Figures 6F, 6G, and S7H). Interestingly, several of the U1 snRNP-associated proteins harbor proline-rich regions, which potentially interact with the A/B boxes in FUBP1, similar to the FUBP1-SF1 interaction discussed above. Indeed, we observed significant changes in the NMR spectrum of FUBP1 A/B upon the addition of a prolinerich peptide from SNRPB (Figure 6H), which were less pronounced with SNRPA and PRPF40B derivates (Figures S7I and S7J). This correlates well with the proline-rich region in SNRPB being much larger than in SNRPA or PRPF40B and thus avidity effects perhaps enhance the binding.

Finally, to confirm the importance of the FUBP1 A/B boxes and their role in splice-site bridging, we performed a complementation assay by expressing full-length GFP-FUBP1 and different mutants in both WT and FUBP1 KO RPE1 cells. Effects on splicing were monitored using the co-transfected MPDZ minigene. As expected, GFP-FUBP1 complements the FUBP1 KO cells and rescues MPDZ exon inclusion close to WT levels (Figures 6I, S7K, and S7L). Importantly, expression of GFPFUBP1 W586,615R (mutations in the A/B boxes) or FUBP1 D C (complete deletion of the C terminus) impairs complementation in FUBP1 KO cells. The same was also observed if the interaction with U2AF2 is perturbed by expressing either FUBP1 A38D (N-box mutation) or FUBP1 D N (complete deletion of the N terminus). Overall, these data demonstrate that both the A/B boxes and the N-box in FUBP1, which mediate the interactions with factors at the 5 0 and 3 0 splice sites, respectively, are functionally relevant for splicing.

## DISCUSSION

## FUBP1is a general component of 3 0 splice site definition

derstood. In this study, we identified FUBP1 as a key component in 3 0 splice site definition. We found that FUBP1 recognizes clustered U-rich elements interspersed by A or G that are present at virtually all 3 0 splice sites and are most abundant for longer introns. Until now, four conserved intron-defining sequence motifs were known: the 5 0 splice site motif, the BP sequence, the Py tract, and the 3 0 splice site motif. 6 We propose the FUBP1 binding motif as a sequence signature that is relevant for spliceosomal assembly at long introns, which represent &gt;80% of all human introns. Consistent with such a general role in splicing, FUBP1 has been detected in purified spliceosomes using mass spectrometry. 70-72

We show that the four KH domains of FUBP1 recognize clustered arrays of binding motifs upstream of the BP. Multivalent interactions enhance binding affinity by avidity and enable the recognition of cis -elements in RNAs of variable length by combining individual KH-RNA motif interactions where multiple clustered RNA motifs may be separated by variable nucleotide linkers. 54 We find that the four KH domains are connected by flexible linkers, which facilitates scanning of extended RNA regions. The recognition of clustered RNA motifs by multidomain RBPs has been observed in IMP proteins and also involves four KH domains. 55 This suggests that KH domains working in concert might be a common mechanism for specifically recognizing clustered RNA motifs in extended RNA regions.

## FUBP1engages in multivalent interactions with 3 0 and 5 0 splice site components

Wecharacterized two interfaces in FUBP1 that mediate proteinprotein interactions: the N-box and the A/B boxes that are embedded in the intrinsically disordered N- and C-terminal regions of FUBP1, respectively. The N-box has been shown to interact with the RRM domain of PUF60 for regulation of transcription. 33,73,74 Here, we found that the FUBP1 N-box also binds to the RRM2 domain of U2AF2 and thereby mediates a functional interaction during pre-mRNA splicing. The N-box binds RRM2 opposite its RNA-binding surface, and thus, RNA

binding and FUBP1 binding do not compete. Notably, we have previously shown that the U2AF2 tandem domains adopt closed conformations and that RNA binding selects open arrangements. 15,29,75 Thus, binding of FUBP1 to the helical face of U2AF2 RRM2 might enhance RNA binding not only by stabilizing U2AF2 on the RNA but also by shifting the tandem RRM arrangements of U2AF2.

The A/B boxes of FUBP1 interact with intrinsically disordered proline-rich sequences within several U1 and U2 snRNP-associated proteins. This matches observations on the A/B boxes of the FUBP1 ortholog PSI in Drosophila melanogaster , which have been shown to bind to a proline-rich region in snRNP-U170K. 59 However, this region is not conserved in the human ortholog SNRNP70, and our BRET studies detected no such interaction between FUBP1 and SNRNP70. In general, linear motifs in proline-rich regions are recognized by structured regions such as WW or SH3 domains. 76 These interactions are generally weak but often enhanced by multivalent interactions. 77-81 Interestingly, the A/B boxes are unique to the FUBP family and appear to be unstructured regions in the ortholog PSI. 59 It will be interesting to learn how prevalent such an atypical mode of proline-rich sequence binding is and how it impacts cellular function.

## FUBP1contributestospliceosomeformationandguides the splicing of long introns

One important question is why FUBP1 is particularly relevant for long introns. Clearly, the splicing of long introns is difficult to achieve. For instance, it has been reported that exons flanking long introns are less included, 82,83 and that the splice sites of longer introns are stronger. 84,85 Consequently, longer introns require more complex regulation, such as the switch from initial exon definition to cross-intron spliceosomal complexes. 84,86 During exon definition, splice sites are recognized and paired across the exon, which is thereby defined as a functional unit. During the subsequent switch to intron definition, the complex shifts to a cross-intron pairing of splice sites (Figure 7). Our data suggest that FUBP1 acts at both steps. We propose that during exon definition, FUBP1 stabilizes U2AF2 and SF1 at the 3 0 splice site. FUBP1 can thus strengthen the initial recognition of 3 0 splice sites via its multivalent interactions with U2AF2, SF1, and pre-mRNA. The stabilization by FUBP1 and its interactions with the U1 snRNP across the exon might thus contribute to splice site recognition during exon definition. 86,87

The interactions between FUBP1 and U1 snRNP components might also be relevant after the switch from exon definition to cross-intron pairing. Consistent with this model, we found that FUBP1 is still present at splice sites until the lariat is formed. In fact, FUBP1 forms cross-links to the U6 snRNA, which replaces U1 snRNA at the 5 0 splice site. This indicates a role for FUBP1 in intron bridging during spliceosomal B-complex formation, particularly for long introns, as our experimental data and kinetic modeling suggest.

Several mechanisms and contributions to splice site bridging have been suggested, for example, the interactions between U1 and U2 snRNP proteins and RNA components 88-90 and the U2AF-associated RNA helicase UAP56. 91 It is conceivable that multiple contact sites act in concert to generate sufficient avidity to bring the splice sites together. Our data suggest that FUBP1through multivalent interactions with pre-mRNA, proteins, and snRNAs located at the 5 0 and 3 0 splice sites-adds to these contacts throughout the splicing cycle. This is most pertinent for long introns harboring multiple FUBP1 cis -regulatory motifs.

In conclusion, we identify FUBP1 as a general splicing factor that ubiquitously binds at 3 0 splice sites by means of a hitherto unknown cis -regulatory RNA sequence motif. The binding of FUBP1 and its interactions with multiple U1 and U2 snRNP components are pertinent to the efficient splicing of long introns.

## Limitations of the study

Uridines are particularly prone to UV cross-linking, which can introduce bias to motif identification by iCLIP. However, we observed similar motifs using methods that do not involve UV cross-linking (NMR spectroscopy, ITC, and EMSA); therefore, we are confident that our conclusions in this regard are valid.

Upon depletion of FUBP1 in our KO or knockdown cell lines, other factors (such as the close paralog KHSRP) might, to some extent, take on the role of FUBP1. Together with cellular quality control mechanisms that degrade mis-spliced transcripts, this might reduce the effects of FUBP1 perturbation that we observed in our RNA-seq analysis. We might clarify such effects in the future by combing acute depletion of FUBP1 by means of degron tags with analysis of nascent RNA.

In general, introns may be characterized by a multitude of features, among which length is just one. For example, intron length is known to correlate with elevated differential GC content and overall lower intron and exon GC content. 65 In addition, genes with longer introns have been shown to preferentially localize to the nuclear periphery, 64 and their transcripts therefore might interact with different splicing factors than for genes at the nuclear center. The question of whether these attributes rather complement each other or are causally related remains to be answered.

## STAR + METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

## SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j. molcel.2023.07.002.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Wethank all the members of the Luck, Sattler, and Ko ¨ nig labs for their help and discussion. We thank Malgorzata Rogalska and Juan Valca ´ rcel for discussions and comments on the manuscript, Philipp Trepte and the Wanker group for sharing protocols and reagents and for help in setting up BRET assays, Christian Sch € afer for help with BRET assays, Eric Schumbera for help with BRET data processing, Fridolin Kielisch for help with statistical analyses, Mario Keller for bioinformatics advice, Andre ´ Moura ˜ o for SNRPB P-rich plasmid, Sam Asami and Gerd Gemmecker for support with NMR experiments, Manuel Kaulich for reagents, and Chris Smith and Jernej Ule for PTBP1-RB40 antibody and resequencing. We thank Adrian Neal for editing and commenting on the manuscript. We thank the Core Facilities at IMB, in particular Protein Production, Microscopy, Bioinformatics, Genomics, and Flow Cytometry.

We acknowledge IMB Genomics Core Facility and its NextSeq 500 sequencer (funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft [DFG, German Research Foundation] INST 247/870-1 FUGG) and access to NMR spectrometers at Bavarian NMR Center. This work was supported by DFG grants to K.L. (LU 2568/1-1; SFB1551 Project no. 464588647), J.K. (SPP1935 Project no. 273941853, KO4566/2-1, SFB1551 Project No. 464588647, TRR 319 Project no. 439669440, and GRK2526/1 Project no. 407023052), K.Z. (SPP1935 Project no. 273941853), S.L. (LE 3473/2-3), and M.S. (SPP1935 Project no. 273941853, SA823/10-1, and SFB1035 Project no. 201302640). C.H. acknowledges the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie for Kekule ´ fellowship, and S.M.-L. acknowledges EU Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation program under the Marie Sk 1 odovska-Curie grant agreement No. 792692. J.S. acknowledges a PhD stipend from IMB's collaborative research initiative.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

S.E., C.B., A. Busch, and A.D.L. performed the bioinformatic analyses. C.H., H.-S.K., and S.M.-L. performed the structural, biophysical, and biochemical experiments and analyses. M.M. Mulorz, A. Buchbender, F.X.R.S., L.L.A., H.H., K.T., and M.M. Mo ¨ ckel performed the functional genomics, in vitro iCLIP, and minigene reporter experiments. D.H., J.S., and M.W. performed the BRET experiments. P.K. and S.L. performed the mathematical modeling. I.E. performed the evolutionary analysis. S.E., C.H., M.M. Mulorz, K.Z., K.L., M.S., and J.K. designed the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and commented on the manuscript.

## DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

## REFERENCES

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Julian Ko ¨ nig (j.koenig@imb-mainz.de).

## Materials availability

## Data and code availability

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## RPE1 cell lines and culture conditions

The hTERT-RPE1 NatNeo Cas9 Mono Puro sens cell line was a generous gift of the Kaulich lab at the Frankfurt CRISPR/Cas Screening Center (FCSC) and are modified from original hTERT RPE1 cells (ATCC, CRL-4000). Cells were grown and maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM): Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F-12; Thermo Fisher 11530566), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (PAN-Biotech), 2 mM glutamine (Thermo Fisher), 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher), and 20 m g/ml hygromycin B (Thermo Fisher). Cells were incubated at 37 /C14 C with 5% CO2. Subcultivation was performed with 3 ml of 0.1% trypsin every 2-3 days for 20 passages. After that, new cells were thawed from stocks containing 1 3 10 6 cells in 1 ml of growth medium, supplemented with 10% DMSO and 50% fetal bovine serum (FBS). For semi-quantitative RT-PCR, 1 3 10 5 RPE1 cells were seeded into one well of a six-well plate (Falcon), one day prior to transfection. DNA (2 m g) was diluted in 100 m l of OptiMEM and transfected with 6.4 m l of Fugene HD reagent (Promega). Cells were incubated at 37 /C14 Cwith 5% CO2 for 24 h before harvesting. For RNAseq, 1.5 3 10 6 cells were seeded in a 10-cm cell culture dish (Corning) 48 h prior to isolation.

## HeLa cell line and culture conditions

HeLa cells (ATCC CCL-2) were grown and maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher), supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine (Thermo Fisher) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher). Cells were incubated at 37 /C14 Cwith 5% CO2. Subcultivation was performed with 3 ml of 0.1% trypsin every 2-3 days for 20 passages. After that, new cells were thawed from stocks containing 1 3 10 6 cells in 1 ml of growth medium, supplemented with 10% DMSO (Sigma) and 50% FBS.

## HEK cell line and culture conditions

HEK293 cells (DSMZ) were grown and maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (PANBiotech), 2 mM glutamine (Thermo Fisher) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher). Cells were incubated at 37 /C14 C with 5% CO2. Subcultivation was performed with 1 ml of 0.05% trypsin every 2-3 days for up to 15 passages. Then, new cells were thawed from stocks containing 2 3 10 6 cells in 1 ml of growth medium, supplemented with 10% DMSO (Sigma) and 90% FBS.

## Recombinant protein expression

Proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells grown in LB medium or M9 minimal medium supplemented with 1 g/l 15 NH4Cl and 2 g/l 13 C-glucose (uniformly labeled) at 37 /C14 C. Protein expression was induced with 1.0 mM isopropyl b -D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG).

## METHOD DETAILS

## Establishing FUBP1 KO/ Nbox mut cell lines

FUBP1 was mutated and knocked out using the CRISPR/Cas9 system in hTERT-RPE1 NatNeo mono puro sens cells. This cell line is puromycin sensitive and expresses Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 under neomycin resistance. For the creation of the FUBP1 KO and FUBP1-Nbox mut RPE1 cell lines, cells were cultured as described above with the addition of neomycin (G418, InvivoGen) to preserve Cas9 expression. Guide RNA (gRNA) was amplified from oligos #54 and #55 (Table S5) with Phusion Polymerase (New England Biolabs) and in vitro transcribed with TranscriptAid Enzyme Mix (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Cells were then transfected with the resulting gRNA using Lipofectamine CRISPRMAX (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer's protocol and incubated for 48 h. To assess the general editing efficiency, a GeneArt Genomic Cleavage Detection Assay (Thermo Fisher) was performed. Edited cells were then sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), and each cell was cultured in a separate well of a 96-well plate (Corning). From each clonal cell line, genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated and amplified by PCR. The successful disruption of the targeted site was validated by enzyme restriction and Sanger sequencing (StarSEQ GmbH, Mainz, Germany) of the colonies. To obtain the novel sequence of the targeted site on both alleles, gDNA was also cloned into TOPO vectors using the Zero Blunt TOPO PCR Cloning Kit (Thermo Fisher), and the obtained plasmids were Sanger-sequenced. All Sanger sequencings were performed with oligo #56 (Table S5). The edited sequences led to mutated protein products, as shown in Figure S5G.

## Immunoblotting

For each hTERT RPE1-derived cell line, 1 3 10 6 cells were seeded on a 10-cm cell culture dish (Corning) and harvested after incubation for 48 h at 37 /C14 C, 5% CO2. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 (Sigma), 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma) and supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Mix (Sigma), and TURBO DNase (Thermo Fisher) for 15 min on ice. Cell debris was precipitated by centrifugation at 16,000 3 g for 15 min at 4 /C14 C. The cleared protein lysate was transferred into a new reaction tube (Eppendorf) and the concentration was measured with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). 20 m g of protein lysate was mixed with 4 3 NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer and heated to 70 /C14 Cfor 10 min. Samples were loaded onto a NuPAGE 1 mm, 4-12% Bis-Tris Mini Protein Gel (Thermo Fisher) and electrophoresis was performed at 180 V, 400 mA for 50 min on a NuPAGE Novex Gel System (Invitrogen). Protein transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane (VWR International) was performed at 30 V, 400 mA over 60 min using the same gel system. The membrane was blocked in 5% milk diluted in PBS-T. The primary antibody (key resources table) was incubated overnight at 4 /C14 C, and the secondary antibody was incubated for 60 min at room temperature. All antibodies were diluted in 5% milk-PBS-T. Between blocking and primary and secondary antibody steps, the membrane was washed three times with PBS-T. Detection was performed with SuperSignal West PICO Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo Fisher) and BioRad GelDoc (BioRad).

## RPE1 RNA-seq

For RPE1 RNA sequencing (ID: imb\_koenig\_2020\_12) and semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis, RPE1 cells were grown as described above. Cells were washed once with DPBS and harvested with a cell scraper in l ml of DPBS. Suspensions were centrifuged at 1,000 3 g for 1 min at 4 /C14 C. RNA was isolated from cell pellets using an RNeasy PLUS Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. For sequencing, RNA concentration was measured by Qubit RNA BR Assay and integrity of the RNA was confirmed by Bioanalyzer RNA Nano Assay (Agilent). Ribosomal RNA was removed and the remaining RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the TruSeq library preparation kit with Ribo-Zero Gold (Illumina). The libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer as 159-nt single-end reads.

## HeLa RNA-seq

200,000 cells were seeded per well in a six-well dish 24 h prior to siRNA treatment. RNA-seq to assess intron splicing in HeLa cells (ID: imb\_koenig\_2018\_18) was performed in four replicates. HeLa cells underwent a control knockdown (KD) with no-target siRNA. Oligos #40-#43 (Table S5) were delivered into cells using 3 m l of Lipofectamine RNAimax (Thermo Fisher) in 100 m l of OptiMEM to achieve a final siRNA concentration of 20 nM. Cells were harvested after incubation for 48 h. RNA was isolated from cell pellets using RNeasy PLUS Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. RNA concentration was measured by Qubit RNA BR Assay, and integrity of the RNA was confirmed by Bioanalyzer RNA Nano Assay (Agilent). Ribosomal RNA was removed and the remaining RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the TruSeq library preparation kit with Ribo-Zero Gold (Illumina). RNA-seq samples were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer as 84-nt single-end reads.

## Semi-quantitative RT-PCR

The MPDZ minigene was created from HeLa gDNA extracts by amplification of chr9:13,183,353-13,189,041 with Phusion HighFidelity Polymerase (New England Biolabs). The PCR fragment was cloned into a pCR2.1 vector by Gibson assembly (IMB Protein Production Core Facility). MPDZ introns were shortened using a Q5 Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (New England Biolabs), resulting in MPDZ D intron , which lacks chr9:13,186,637-13,188,633 and chr9:13,183,736-13,186,120, MPDZ D BS , lacking chr9:13,186,494-13,186,618 and chr9:13,183,632-13,186,718, and MPDZ D intron+ D BS , lacking chr9:13,186,494-13,188,633 and chr9:13,183,632-13,186,120 (Figure S6B). The open reading frames for GFP and the FUBP1 variants (FUBP1 FL , FUBP1 D N , FUBP1 A38D , FUBP1 D C , FUBP1 W586,615R ) used in the complementation assay were integrated in a pcDNA5 vector containing a CMV promoter and an N-terminal GFP tag, which was then used to transform DH5alpha cells (Invitrogen). All expression vectors and minigenes are described in Table S6. Plasmid purification was performed with the Qiaprep Spin Miniprep Kit (Qiagen) or the Qiaprep Plasmid Plus Midi Kit (Qiagen). Sequences were verified by Sanger sequencing. All hTERT RPE1 cell lines were seeded, transfected, and harvested as described in the section "RPE1 cell culture". For complementation, an equimolar amount of expression vector and minigene was used. RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen) and reverse transcribed using the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher). The minigene cDNA was then amplified using OneTaq DNA Polymerase according to the manufacturer's protocol and oligos #57 and #58 as primers (Table S5). Splicing products were assessed on a High Sensitivity D1000 ScreenTape (Agilent) (Figure S6D). The percent spliced-in (PSI) value for the alternative exon was determined using the following formula: Inclusion / (Inclusion + Skipping) . PSI values in the complementation experiment were normalized to the mean of the wild-type (WT) within each condition. Statistical significance was assessed by Student's t-test and multiple testing correction was performed using the false discovery rate (FDR).

## In vivo iCLIP

In vivo iCLIP was used to study protein-RNA interactions with individual nucleotide resolution. 43 For the U2AF2 in vivo iCLIP study, data from two iCLIP experiments were combined. The first U2AF2 and PTBP1 in vivo iCLIP experiments were performed as previously described. 114 The second U2AF2 in vivo iCLIP experiment as well as in vivo iCLIP experiments on FUBP1, SF1, and SF3B1 were performed using the iCLIP2 protocol as previously described. 44 In brief, HeLa cells were irradiated (150 mJ/cm 2 ) in a CL1000 UV crosslinker (UPV) to covalently bond the RNA-binding proteins to the bound nucleic acids. For in vivo iCLIP of FUBP1, crosslinking was achieved by 4-thiouridine (4sU)-mediated crosslinking (see section below). During subsequent cell lysis, the lysate was DNasetreated with TURBO DNase (Thermo Fisher) and RNA was partially digested to create 50-200-nt fragments. Immunoprecipitation of the investigated proteins was performed with antibodies listed in the key resources table. The anti-PTBP1 antibody was a kind gift from Christopher Smith. 115 Radioactive labeling at the 3 0 end of the precipitated RNA enables visualization of the RNP complex by SDS-PAGE and transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane. After recovery of protein-RNA complexes from the membrane, proteinase K digestion resulted in protein-free RNA. cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription, which stops at the crosslinked site, leading to truncated reads in the sequencing. The cDNA was cleaned twice using MyONE Silane beads (Thermo Fisher). PCR amplification and ProNex size selection were performed to amplify and purify the library, respectively. In vivo iCLIP libraries (except PTBP1 libraries) were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer as 92-nt single-end reads including a 6-nt (or 4-nt in the case of the first U2AF2 iCLIP) sample barcode as well as 5+4-nt (or 3+2-nt) unique molecular identifiers (UMIs). PTBP1 iCLIP libraries were sequenced on an Illumina GA-II machine 116 and then re-sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 machine as 50-nt single-end reads including a 4-nt sample barcode and 3+2-nt UMIs.

## 4-thiouridine crosslinking of FUBP1 in vivo iCLIP

For the FUBP1 in vivo iCLIP, HeLa cells were 4sU-labeled by adding 0.1 M 4sU in DMSO to a final concentration of 100 m Mina10-cm cell culture dish. Cells were incubated for 16 h at 37 /C14 C, 5% CO2, with the exclusion of light. After incubation, the cells were moved onto ice, shielded from light and irradiated at 365 nm, 800 mJ. Then, iCLIP was performed as described above.

## In vitro iCLIP

In vitro iCLIP measures the intrinsic RNA-binding affinity of an RNA-binding protein (RBP). 28 To that end, recombinant proteins and in vitro transcripts resembling long natural transcripts 28 or a large-scale RNA pool transcribed from an oligonucleotide library were mixed and subjected to UV crosslinking and immunoprecipitation of the RBP of interest.

## Production of recombinant proteins

N-terminally 6xHis-tagged U2AF2 RRM12 was purified as previously described. 28 In brief, a recombinant construct (Table S6) was expressed in E. coli BL21-CodonPlus (DE3)-RIL cells (Agilent) for 3-4 h at 37 /C14 Cusing LB-Media and 1 mM IPTG. U2AF2 RRM12 was purified using Ni Sepharose 6 Fast Flow beads (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and concentrated with Spin-X UF 500 5K MWCO columns (Corning) to a concentration of 1.156 mg/ml before being flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at /C0 80 /C14 C. All three N-terminally 6xHis-tagged FUBP1 protein variants (FUBP1 FL , FUBP1 D N , FUBP1 N74 ; Table S6) were expressed overnight at 16 /C14 C using LB media and 1 mM IPTG. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 5% glycerol, EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail), using a CF1 Cell Disrupter (Constant Systems). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (40,000 3 g , 30 min, 4 /C14 C). Recombinant proteins were affinity-purified from cleared lysates using an NGC Quest Plus FPLC system (Biorad) and a HisTrap FF 5 ml column (Cytiva) according to the manufacturers' protocols. Full-length FUBP1 FL and FUBP1 D N proteins were diluted 1:10 in heparin binding buffer (30 mM Na-HEPES, 20 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.4), loaded onto a Heparin HP 5 ml column (Cytiva) and eluted over 15 column volumes using a linear gradient of 20-1000 mM NaCl in the heparin binding buffer. All FUBP1 variants were concentrated using Amicon 15 ml spin concentrators (Merck Millipore) and subjected to gel filtration (Superdex 200 16/60 pg in 30 mM Na-HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 5% glycerol, pH 7.4). Peak fractions containing the recombinant proteins after gel filtration were pooled, and protein concentration was determined by using absorbance spectroscopy and the respective extinction coefficient at 280 nm, before aliquots were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at /C0 80 /C14 C. For the detailed workflow, log files can be requested from Dr. Julian Ko ¨ nig.

## Preparation of long in vitro transcripts

Long in vitro transcripts were prepared as described in Sutandy et al. 28 Minigene and spike-in RNAs were created by PCR amplification of DNA templates using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer's protocol. In vitro transcription of gel-purified PCR products was performed using HiScribe T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen), followed by DNA digestion with TURBO DNase and another RNA extraction. RNA quality was verified by capillary electrophoresis using High Sensitivity RNA ScreenTape (Agilent). RNA concentration was measured with a Qubit RNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). Aliquots of equimolar mixes of all minigenes as well as spike-in aliquots were stored at /C0 80 /C14 C.

## In vitro iCLIP with long in vitro transcripts

In vitro iCLIP with long in vitro transcripts (ID: imb\_koenig\_2018\_01\_sub16) was performed for U2AF2 RRM12 alone or supplemented with different FUBP1 variants. The experiment was performed with a pool of eight in vitro transcripts ( C4BPB , MPDZ , MYC , MYL6 , NF1 , TENT2 , PCBP2 , and PTBP2 , see GEO record GSE220183) as previously described. 28 The in vitro transcripts were preheated for 5 min at 70 /C14 C to minimize RNA secondary structure. Then, in vitro transcripts at a final concentration of 2 nM were added to 50 nM U2AF2 RRM12 either alone (three replicates) or supplemented with either 50 nM FUBP1 FL (two replicates), 50 nM FUBP1 D N (two replicates), or 50 nM FUBP1 N74 (two replicates). The mixtures were incubated at 37 /C14 Cfor 5 min before UV irradiation at 50 mJ/cm 2 . The in vitro iCLIP reaction was spiked with 10 m l of crosslinked mixture containing 250 nM U2AF2 RRM12 and 6 nM NUP133 in vitro transcript for normalization. 28 Partial RNase digestion and DNase treatment, followed by the standard iCLIP protocol, were performed as described in the section " In vivo iCLIP ". After reverse transcription, the cDNA was purified and libraries were generated according to the iCLIP2 protocol. 44

## Preparation of oligo-derived transcripts

A total of 1,998 DNA oligonucleotides were chosen to represent 182-nt regions around 3 0 splice sites, including the last 132 nt upstream of a 3 0 splice site and the first 50 nt of the downstream exon, preceded by 18 nt of T7 promoter sequence for the reverse transcription. The genomic coordinates of all regions represented in the oligonucleotide library are listed in GEO record GSE220183. The DNA oligonucleotides were purchased from TWIST Bioscience (South San Francisco, CA). Before in vitro transcription, L3 adapter ligation was performed. This was achieved by resuspending the DNA pellet in T4 RNA ligase (New England Biolabs) mix containing a 1:10 oligo/adapter ratio for high ligation efficiency. This mixture was reacted overnight at 16 /C14 Cat 1300 rpm and then inactivated at 98 /C14 Cfor 5 min. L3-ligated DNA oligonucleotide (2.6 ng) was amplified using the Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Amplicons were purified twice using the ProNex Dual SizeSelective Purification System (Promega) with an optimized bead/library ratio of first 1.13 and then 0.5. Capillary electrophoresis with a High Sensitivity D1000 ScreenTape (Agilent) was used for quality control. Then, in vitro transcription was performed for 4 h at 37 /C14 C by following the HiScribe T7 (New England Biolabs) protocol for short transcripts. Subsequently, RNA was treated with TURBODNaseI and isolated using Qiagen's protocol for "Total RNA containing small RNA from cells" (RNeasy Plus Mini Handbook, Appendix E) with the reagents mentioned above.

## in vitro iCLIP on oligo-derived transcripts

For in vitro iCLIP with an oligonucleotide-derived RNA pool (ID: imb\_koenig\_2018\_01\_sub12), the oligonucleotide-derived transcript pool at a concentration of 50 nM was preheated for 5 min at 70 /C14 C and incubated with 50 nM U2AF2 RRM12 alone or with either 50 or 300 nM FUBP1 FL (three replicates each) for 10 min before UV irradiation at 50 mJ/cm 2 . iCLIP was performed as described in the section " In vivo iCLIP ", omitting the partial RNase digestion and L3 linker ligation steps as they do not apply here. The reaction was spiked with a mix of 10 150-nt long spike-in oligonucleotides for normalization (oligos #44-#53; Table S5).

## Sequencing and data preprocessing

In vitro iCLIP libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer as 150-nt single-end reads including a 6-nt sample barcode as well as 5+4-nt UMIs. The reads were bioinformatically preprocessed as described for in vivo iCLIP samples. The number of uniquely mapped reads for all in vitro iCLIP samples are given in Table S1.

## Protein expression and purification

All plasmids encoding sequences of FUBP1, U2AF2, chimeric U2AF2 linker-RRM2 /FUBP1 N-box (linked by a 14 GS linker), SF1, SNRPA, SNRPB, and PRPF40B were cloned into the pETM11 vector or pET24 vector with a His tag, His-GB1 tag, or His-protein A tag, followed by a TEV cleavage site. The point mutants of FUBP1 were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. All constructs are listed in Table S6.

Recombinant proteins were expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells in LB medium or M9 minimal medium supplemented with 1 g/l 15 NH4Cl and 2 g/l 13 C-glucose (uniformly labeled). After growth of the bacterial cells to an OD600 value of 0.8, protein expression was induced with 1.0 mM IPTG followed by overnight expression at 18 /C14 C. After resuspension in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole (supplemented with lysozyme, 1 mg/ml DNase, 2 mM MgSO4, and protease inhibitor), the cells were lysed using a French press. Cleared lysates were added to Ni-NTA resin, washed with 2 M NaCl and eluted with 500 mM imidazole. The His tag was cleaved with His-tagged TEV protease at 4 /C14 Covernight. The protein was further purified by removing the cleaved His tag, uncleaved protein and TEV protease from the desired protein on a second Ni-NTA column. All proteins were further purified by ion-exchange chromatography on RESOURCE S or RESOURCE Q columns (Cytiva) (20 mM Tris, pH 8.0 or 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.5, gradient from 0 to 1 M NaCl in 10 column volumes) followed by size-exclusion chromatography on a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) (20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.5, 150 mM NaCl).

## NMR spectroscopy

All NMR samples ( 13 C 15 N- or 15 N-labeled, as appropriate) were measured at concentrations of 0.1-1 mM in NMR buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.5, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT) containing 10% (v/v) D2O at 25 /C14 Con900-, 800-, 600-, or 500-MHz Bruker Avance NMR spectrometers (cryogenic triple-resonance gradient probes). The NMR spectra were processed with TOPSPIN3.5 (Bruker) or NMRPipe 93 and analyzed using NMRFAM-Sparky. 94

## Chemical shift assignment

Protein backbone assignments were obtained from standard HNCA, HNCACB, CBCA(CO)NH, HNHA backbone experiments. Specifically, for KH domains, the 1 H- 15 NHSQCspectrumofKH1-4wasfirstassigned, then corresponding assignments were transferred to the spectra of the individual and tandem KH domains. Further side-chain resonances were assigned using CC(CO)NH, HCC(CO) NH, hCCH-TOCSY and HcCH-TOCSY experiments. The distance restraints for structure calculations were obtained from 3D 15 Nand 13 C-edited NOESY-HSQC experiments. 117,118 Secondary structure propensities were derived from the difference of Ca and Cb chemical shifts to the random coil shifts. 119-121

## Relaxation experiments

## Titrations

For NMR titrations, 1 H- 15 N HSQC spectra were measured after each addition of titrant and the changes were visualized by calculating the CSP. 123 The K D values were calculated from NMR titrations by plotting the CSP of selected peaks (8) against the ligand concentration and fitting the data as previously described. Standard deviations of the mean were calculated from K D values of the 8 selected peaks. 124

## Structure calculation

To stabilize the U2AF2 and FUBP1 interaction, a chimeric construct of U2AF2 RRM2 and FUBP1 N-box was introduced for the subsequent structure determination (Table S6). Overall structural integrity of the chimeric construct and recapitulation of the interaction was confirmed by comparing 1 H- 15 N HSQC spectra of the chimeric construct to that of the intermolecular complex U2AF2RRM2-FUBP1 N-box (Figures S3I and S3J). CYANA3 (3.98.15) was used for automated NOE assignments and initial structure calculations. 95 To overcome partial signal broadenings for the resonances at the interface of the two domains, possibly due to the weaker affinity, additional unambiguous intramolecular distance restraints from 13 C-NOESY-HMQC and methyl-NOESY spectra were manually assigned and included in the structure calculation. 125 A minimal number of typical hydrogen bonds, which were confirmed by 15 N-edited NOESY and secondary structure propensity, was implemented to assist the initial folding during the structure calculation. Dihedral angle restraints were derived from SSP and 13 C secondary chemical shifts using TALOS+, including resonances of Ca, Cb, C, H, and N. 96,126 For water refinement, distance restraints from CYANA3 considering an error of ± 0.5 A ˚ are used. Water refinement 127 of the 20 lowest-energy structures (500 initial structures) was performed with ARIA2.3 97 and CNS. 128 The quality of the 10 final structures was evaluated by ProcheckNMR 98 and PSVS. 99 Ensemble structure root mean square (r.m.s.) deviations were calculated using MolMol 100 and the ribbon representations were prepared in PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.8.6.0, Schro ¨ dinger, LLC). Structural statistics are shown in Table 1.

## Scaffold-independent analysis

For the initial screening, the 16 DNA pools of 5-mer DNA (Table S5, #63, IDT), instead of RNA due to their similarity in binding, were generated by introducing a specific nucleotide at a designated position while randomizing the other four positions. Titrations of 100 m M FUBP1 KH domain samples with the different DNA pools (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 molar equivalents of titrant to analyte) were performed at 25 /C14 C in NMR buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.5, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT) containing 10% (v/v) D2O by recording SOFAST HMQC spectra on a 600 MHz Bruker Avance NMR spectrometer (cryogenic triple-resonance gradient probe). For the comparison and identification of position-specific nucleotide preference, we focused on a subset of 12 representative peaks, which show visibly clear changes in chemical shift (fast-exchange regime) and are therefore involved in binding, for further analysis. CSPs of these peaks were calculated (see above) and the average CSPs of all peaks for each pool were normalized against the largest CSP calculated in the four pools to obtain a score for nucleotide preference at a specific position. The final optimized motifs were verified by comparing the chemical shift changes upon adding either DNA or RNA for all KH domains (Table S5, #67-72). 129

All RNA samples were in vitro transcribed using T7 RNA polymerase, precipitated by ethanol and purified by denaturing PAGE (12% polyacrylamide gel containing 8 M urea). The DNA templates for in vitro transcription are shown in Table S5 (Oligos #59-62). The gel slices were electro-eluted at 250 V in 0.5 3 TBE. To promote proper folding, the RNA samples were heated to 95 /C14 C for 2 min and subsequently snap-cooled on ice before use.

## Fluorescent EMSA

In vitro -transcribed RNA was fluorescently labeled by ligation of pCp-Cy5 to the 3' end of the RNA with T4 RNA ligase 2. Subsequently, the reaction was purified using a spin column kit (Norgen Biotek Corp.). For binding studies, 100 nM labeled RNA in 20 mMsodium phosphate, pH 6.5, 50 mM NaCl and glycerol (15% final concentration) was incubated with increasing concentrations of FUBP1 N-box+KH1-4 (amino acids 1-457) for 15 min. Mixtures were loaded onto a 0.7% agarose gel. Gel electrophoresis was performed in 1 3 TBE buffer at 40 V for 4 h. Detection was performed using a Typhoon 9200 (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) at 649 nm. Data analysis was performed in Image J 2.1.0. 102 Experiments were repeated to estimate the standard deviation of the mean.

## Isothermal titration calorimetry

ITC experiments were performed on a MicroCalPEAQ-ITC instrument (Malvern Panalytical) using non-isotopically labeled proteins as analyte sample and titrant or non-isotopically labeled protein as analyte and DNA oligonucleotides as titrant in NMR buffer at 25 /C14 C. U2AF2 constructs (concentration 15-30 m M) were titrated with FUBP1 N-terminal constructs (concentration 1.5-3.0 mM); FUBP1 double-KH domain constructs (concentration 20-30 m M) were titrated with DNA oligonucleotides (concentration 200-350 m M, Table S5, #64-66); in vitro -transcribed ssRNA ( VPS13D , 15 m M) was titrated with FUBP1 KH (150 m M). Binding affinity analysis was performed using MicroCalPEAQ-ITC Analysis Software (Malvern Panalytical). The standard deviations of the K D values were estimated based on the differences in triplicate measurements.

## BRET plasmid construction

The donor and acceptor vectors pcDNA3.1-cmyc-NL-GW (Addgene plasmid ID #113446), pcDNA3.1-GW-NL-cmyc (Addgene plasmid ID #113447), pcDNA3.1-GW-mCit, pcDNA3.1-mCit-GW, as well as controls pcDNA3.1-NL-cmyc (Addgene plasmid ID #113442), pcDNA3.1-PA-mCit (Addgene plasmid ID #113443), and pcDNA3.1-PA-mCit-NL-cmyc (Addgene plasmid ID #113444) were kindly provided by the Wanker group (Max-Delbr € uck-Centrum f € ur Molekulare Medizin, Germany). The GATEWAY entry vectors pDON221 and pDON223 were provided by the Vidal group (Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA). All vectors were amplified and full-length sequenced using the primers given in Table S5. Full-length wild-type ORFs being cloned into GATEWAY entry vectors were amplified from a human ORFeome collection. 130 The ORFs were full-length sequenced using primers shown in Table S5. ORFs of FUBP1 , SNRNP70 , and TCERG1 (Table S6) were PCR-amplified with primers #9-10, #27-28, and #33-34, respectively (Table S5) and shuttled into pDON223 using a BP clonase II mix kit (Invitrogen). The Q5 site-directed mutagenesis kit (Invitrogen) was used to produce the following mutants: pDON223-FUBP1\_A38D, pDON223-FUPB1\_W586R\_W615R, and pDON223-FUBP1\_1-530aa (Table S6). For BRET experiments, all cDNAs were shuttled from the entry vectors into the BRET destination vectors using LR clonase technology (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. After the LR cloning step, the inserts were partially sequenceconfirmed. All primers used are given in Table S5 and all the constructs are listed in Table S6.

## Transfection

The human embryonic kidney 293 cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) transfection reagent in Opti-MEM medium(ThermoFisher) using the reverse transfection method according to the manufacturer's instructions. For BRET transfections, cells were seeded at a density of 4.0 3 10 4 cells per well on a white 96-well microtiter plate (Greiner) in phenol-red-free, high-glucose DMEM media (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 5% FBS (Thermo Fisher). Transfections were performed with a total amount of 200 ng of DNA per well. If the amount of expression plasmid was less than 200 ng in a well, pcDNA3.1 (+) was used as a carrier DNA to achieve the total of 200 ng.

## Experiments

Cells were transfected with plasmids encoding the acceptor (50 ng DNA) and donor (1 ng DNA). The plate was incubated for 2 days at 37 /C14 C, 5% CO2, and 85% relative humidity prior to measurement. All measurements were performed on an Infinite M200 Pro microplate reader (Tecan). First, 100 m l of the medium was aspirated from each well. The mCitrine fluorescence was measured in intact cells (excitation/emission 513/548 nm). Then, coelenterazine h (PJK Biotech GmbH) was added at a final concentration of 5 m M. The cells were briefly shaken and incubated for 15 min inside the plate reader. After incubation, total luminescence was measured first followed by short-wavelength and long-wavelength luminescence measurements using BLUE1 (370-480 nm) and GREEN1 (520-570 nm) filters at 1,000 ms integration time. Corrected BRET (cBRET) ratios were calculated as previously described. 58 In brief, for every transfected protein pair NL-A and mCit-B, the following two control pairs were measured: NL-Stop with mCit-B and NL-A with mCit-Stop. The maximal BRET from both control pairs was subtracted from the actual test pair to correct for donor bleedthrough, nonspecific binding to the tags, and background signal.

## Saturation assay

For donor saturation experiments 1 ng of donor DNA encoding NL-fused proteins was co-transfected with increasing amounts of acceptor DNA encoding mCitrine-fused proteins (10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 400 ng). Fluorescence, total luminescence, and BRET were measured as described before. BRET measurements were corrected for bleed-through using NL-Stop transfections. Fluorescence and total luminescence measurements were used to estimate the amount of expressed proteins and used to plot acceptor/ donor ratios on the x -axis.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Preprocessing of RNA-seq data

Prior to genomic mapping, remaining adapter sequences were trimmed in RNA-seq data from FUBP1 KO, FUBP1-Nbox mut , and WT control RPE1 cells using Cutadapt v2.4. 108 A minimal overlap of 1 nt between reads and adapter was required and only reads with a length of at least 50 nt after trimming were retained for further analysis (parameters: -O 1 -m 50). Reads were mapped using STAR v2.6.1b, 107 allowing up to 4% of the mapped bases to be mismatched (--outFilterMismatchNoverLmax 0.04 --outFilterMismatchNmax 999) and a splice junction overhang (--sjdbOverhang) of 83 nt for HeLa WT samples and of 158 nt for FUBP1 KO, FUBP1-Nbox mut , and WT control RPE1 cells. Genome assembly and annotation of GENCODE 131 release 31 were used during mapping. Subsequently, secondary hits were removed using Samtools v1.9. 109 Exonic read counts per gene were extracted using featureCounts from the Subread tool suite v1.6.2 110 with non-default parameters --donotsort -s2.

## Preprocessing of in vivo iCLIP data

## Metaprofiles for in vivo iCLIP data

Four RNA-seq replicates from HeLa cells (imb\_koenig\_2018\_18) served as the source for the identification of spliced introns. Mapping to the genome was performed in STAR v2.6.1b 107 (Table S1). Coordinates and number of unique supporting junction reads ("ureads") of spliced introns were extracted from the SJ file output by STAR containing high-confidence splice junctions. In the following, introns from the SJ file are called "SJ introns". SJ introns had to meet a reproducibility criterion (at least 3 out of 4 replicates). In addition, all overlapping SJ introns were removed. Finally, introns were overlaid with GENCODE release 31 annotation and filtered for level &lt; 3, transcript support level &lt; 4, and gene\_type and transcript\_type equal to "protein coding". This resulted in 88,375 SJ introns. Branch point (BP) prediction was taken from LaBranchoR. 133 LaBranchoR is based on hg19, liftOver to hg38 was done with the liftOver tool by UCSC. 134 The median distance of BP to 3 0 splice sites was 25 nt. 88,008 out of 88,375 SJ introns had an annotated BP. Introns were further filtered for a minimum length of 100 nt and a maximum length of 17,000 nt. Metaprofiles were aligned at the BP. In vivo iCLIP replicates for each RBP were summed up and a signal threshold of 10 in the metaprofile region ( /C0 200 nt to +50 nt with respect to the BP) was imposed. Crosslinking signals per intron were normalized by "ureads" and averaged per nucleotide over all introns. For display, the normalized signal was smoothed with a Gaussian window function and window size

10. Binding enrichment for RNA maps stratified by intron length and splice site features was calculated by taking the log2 fold change of the ratio of the area under the curve (AUC) of each feature bin to the AUC in the shortest intron class or class with the weakest splice site feature. The following regions were used for AUC quantification, always with respect to BP: [ /C0 100, /C0 25] for FUBP1, [+5, +25] for U2AF2, [ /C0 10, +10] for SF1, and [ /C0 30, /C0 10] for SF3B1. The minimum signal in each region served as a background proxy and was taken as the lower horizontal boundary in which the AUC was calculated. For RNA maps stratified by GC content, the average GC content in the exon was contrasted to the average GC content in the first 100 nt of the downstream intron. Signal values for RNA maps aligned at 5 0 splice sites were not smoothed but normalized by the average signal in the first 100 nt of the intron. RNA maps conditioned on exon rank: annotation of exons and downstream introns was extracted from GENCODE release 31. BPs were annotated as described above. SJ introns were matched to introns. Duplicated matches were resolved such that the intron with the shortest upstream exon was taken. Five exon rank classes were extracted: 1st exon, exon ranks in [2,5), [5,12), [12, 144] and second to last exon. In comparison to all other RNA maps, crosslinking signals per intron were normalized to the total crosslinking signal in the last 100 nt upstream of the 3 0 splice site. "ureads" correlates with exon rank and was thus not suitable as a normalization factor. RNA maps conditioned on exon GC content: upstream exons were identified as for exon rank RNA maps. Total exon GC content over exon length was extracted. Bins are as follows: [0.07,0.41], (0.41, 0.46], (0.46, 0.53], (0.53, 0.6], (0.6, 0.91]. RNA maps condition on intron GCcontent: total intron GC content over intron length was extracted. Bins were as follows: [0.14, 0.36], (0.36, 0.4], (0.4, 0.46], (0.46, 0.55], (0.55, 0.9]. RNA maps for fixed intron length/differential GC content architecture followed by subsequent conditioning on differential GC content/intron length. Here, RNA binding profiles were first stratified on one class of intron length/differential GC content architecture, followed by stratification on all levels of the other factor. Binding for all RNA maps was quantified based on AUC as described above. Analyses were performed in R v4.1.1. 104

## iCLIP binding site definition (peak calling)

Binding site definition for in vivo iCLIP was done with PureCLIP v1.3.1. on merged replicates. 112 PureCLIP was issued with the options -iv 'chr1;chr2;chr3;' -ld -nt 4. The crosslink sites identified by PureCLIP were post-processed as previously described. 132 In detail, individual crosslink sites within a distance of 5 nt were clustered into binding regions. The binding regions were resized to obtain binding sites of a uniform width. To compare binding sites of different RBPs, we opted for 5-nt binding sites (i.e., 2 nt on either side of the position with the maximum signal) for all of the RBPs investigated (FUBP1, U2AF2, SF3B1, SF1, PTBP1). Isolated crosslink sites and binding regions of 2 nt were removed. Binding regions % 5 nt were centered on the position with the maximum crosslink signal and extended by 2 nt on either side. Binding regions &gt; 5 nt were divided into regions of 5 nt, by iteratively screening for the maximum signal and extending of 2 nt on either side, excluding an overlap between binding regions. Finally, at least three positions with crosslink events were required to only keep binding sites with sufficient support. To ensure sufficient support of binding sites in the individual replicates of the experiment, a reproducibility filter was applied. In order to consider the varying number and size of replicates for each experiment, we filtered for those binding sites with a total number of crosslink events higher than the 10% percentile of the distribution of crosslink counts in the single replicate. In addition, a minimum of two crosslink events was required if the 10% percentile in the replicate was below this threshold. This was required in at least two out of three, three out of four and three out of five replicates depending on the number of replicates available for the respective experiment. The numbers of called binding sites per protein are given in Table S1.

## Saturation analysis

Spliced introns were identified from four RNA-seq replicates in HeLa cells (imb\_koenig\_2018\_18) as described above. Introns were retained if they were longer than 200 nt, and if the 5 0 splice site windows (the last 50 nt of the exon plus the first 75 nt of the intron) and 3 0 splice site windows (the last 200 nt of the intron plus the first 20 nt of the exon) were not overlapping. 3 0 splice sites overlapping to noncoding and long noncoding RNAs were excluded, resulting in 98,328 3 0 splice sites. These splice sites were binned into percentiles, based on "ureads" (splice site usage) averaged over replicates. RBP binding sites were assigned to curated 3 0 splice sites (the last 200 nt of the intron), requiring full overlap. For each bin, the percentage of 3 0 splice sites with at least one binding site for the specific RBP was calculated (Figure 1E).

## Motif enrichment for in vivo iCLIP

Introns were defined based on GENCODE annotation (release 31). Annotation was filtered for level &lt; 3, transcript support level &lt; 4, and gene\_type and transcript\_type equal to "protein coding", resulting in 202,623 introns. BP annotation was done as specified above. 200,199 out of 202,623 had an annotated BP. Introns were further filtered for overlaps and for having a length of at least 250 nt upstream of the defined BP. The length requirement was set to ensure that the main position of FUBP1 binding was not confounded with the 5 0 splice site signal. FUBP1 binding sites (n = 854,404) were filtered for positioning within a 150-nt window upstream of the BP, resulting in 167,408 binding sites. Binding sites were ranked by their normalized signal, that is, the signal in the extended binding site (5 nt ± 5 nt) over total intron signal over intron length. Disjunct 4-mer frequencies were counted in the top/bottom 20% binding sites based on normalized signal to account for overall crosslinking preferences. Additionally, non-bound intronic regions in introns hosting the top 20% FUBP1 binding sites were also considered as an alternative background set. Here, disjunct 4-mer frequencies were calculated for all non-bound intronic regions, excluding a 20-nt region downstream of the 5 0 splice site and a 150-nt region upstream of the BP. Enrichment was defined as the distance from each data point to the diagonal in a scatterplot comparing the top 20% versus bottom 20% binding sites and, alternatively, non-bound intronic sequences. Analyses were performed in R v4.1.1. 104

## Motif enrichment upstream of branch points

Introns were extracted and BP annotated as above (200,199 introns left). Introns were further filtered for a minimum length of 500 nt and disjunct 200-nt windows upstream of the BP, resulting in 151,836 introns. Disjunct 4-mer frequencies were calculated in a position-wise manner in a 200-nt window upstream of the BP. Average background motif frequencies were calculated in a 100-nt long window 100 nt downstream of the 5 0 splice site. Enrichment was defined as the distance from each data point to the diagonal in the scatterplot of position-wise frequencies versus average background frequencies.

## Abundance of FUBP1 motif at 3 0 splice sites

Disjunct motif occurrences were counted in a 75-nt long window 25 nt upstream of the BP. The background distribution was derived as the occurrences of nine randomly drawn motifs of length 4, repeated 100 times.

## Analysis of in vitro iCLIP data

All samples were merged for binding site definition (peak calling) across replicates and conditions. Each in vitro transcript was divided into 9-nt windows, always shifted by one nucleotide. Windows were sorted by total signal and, while excluding overlapping peaks, generating a candidate. A negative binomial distribution was fit (maximum likelihood fit) to the signals on the candidate peak list. All peaks with a total signal exceeding the 90% quantile of the theoretical distribution were retained for final processing (109 peaks, see GEO record GSE220183). The background ranges were the in vitro transcript regions minus extended peaks (9 nt ± 5 nt). For quantifying the binding differences between conditions, replicates were averaged. Peak signals were normalized against background signals. RNA maps were based on 21 3 0 splice sites present in the in vitro transcripts. To correct for differences in expression, nucleotide-wise signals were normalized by total in vitro transcript signals. Subsequently, signals were summarized per nucleotide by the 75% quantile. Replicates were averaged and subjected to Gaussian window smoothing with window size 10 before display. All analyses were performed in R v4.1.1. 104

## Analysis of oligo in vitro iCLIP

All data was normalized according to the total signal of all available spike-ins. Values were then extracted either per nucleotide or by binding site. Binding site positions were taken from overlays with in vivo U2AF2binding sites in the intronic part of the oligonucleotide. 1,831 oligonucleotides harbored an U2AF2 binding site in the intronic part (see GEO record GSE220183). If multiple binding sites were present, that with the highest average signal in the U2AF2 samples was taken as representative. For quantifying the addition of FUBP1 on U2AF2 binding sites, only those binding sites with signal greater than the 25% quantile in one of the three replicates were considered, resulting in 1,504 binding sites. The absolute number of disjunct occurrences of the FUBP1 motif set ("TTTT" and all combinations of "TTT" and either one "A" or one "G") was counted in a 75-nt long region located 25 nt upstream of the BP. All analyses were performed in R v4.1.1. 104

## Intron length analyses of RNA-seq data

Splicing changes of FUBP1 KO and FUBP1-Nbox mut were analyzed with MAJIQ v2.2 135,136 with default parameter settings. MAJIQ outputs local splice variations (LSV), which were filtered as follows: for each LSV, the top two junctions in terms of absolute difference in junction usage (delta percent selected index, | D PSI|) were taken as representative LSVs. At least one of these two junctions needed to have an absolute D PSI &gt; 0.1 and a detection probability &gt; 0.9 (skipped for control events). Subsequently, events were filtered for exon-skipping events. Each cassette exon was then annotated with the upstream and downstream intron: genomic coordinates of the upstream/downstream intron were immediately defined in "source"/"target" events. The genomic coordinates of the respective other intron were extracted from annotation (GENCODE release 31). Overlapping cassette exons were resolved such that the event with the largest | D PSI| was retained (Table S3). A two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to assess statistical significance.

## ENCODE data analysis

We retrieved raw RNA-seq data derived from an shRNA-knockdown experiment for FUBP1 in the cell line K562 from the ENCODE data portal (https://www.encodeproject.org/), using accession numbers ENCSR608IXR ( FUBP1 KD) and ENCSR260BQC (control). Alignment was performed in STAR (version 2.7.8a) 107 with standard ENCODE options. We applied MAJIQ v2.3 135,136 to identify and quantify cassette exons in the RNA-seq data. First, a splice graph was built on the BAM files and the GENCODE gene annotation (v38, human genome version hg38). Then, the difference in junction usage between knockdown and control samples was calculated (as D PSI). Next, alternative splicing events such as cassette exons (CEs) were categorized and quantified in the splicing graph using MAJIQ Modulizer. Probabilities were calculated for each junction, testing for | D PSI| &gt; 0.05 (probability changing [Ps]) and | D PSI| &lt; 0.02 (probability non-changing [Pn]). The MAJIQ Modulizer output was then processed in R, filtering for significantly regulated CEsandacontrol group with unregulated CEs. A CE is defined as significantly regulated if | D PSI| R 0.055 for all junctions, P s R 0.9 for at least one junction pair (inclusion junction + skipping junction), the sign within both junction pairs is inverse, and within the junction pairs the lower | D PSI| is at least 50% of the higher | D PSI|. A CE is considered to be unregulated if Pn R 0.5 and | D PSI| % 0.02 for all junctions. Overall, this resulted in a total of 173 significantly regulated CEs and a control group with 1,910 unregulated CEs for further analysis. To categorize CEs into more included and less included, a representative D PSI was chosen for each CE based on the maximum | D PSI| of both inclusion junctions. Based on this, there were 30 more-included and 143 less-included exons.

## Splicing changes upon FUBP1 LoF mutations

Significant differentially spliced exon-skipping events upon (i) loss-of-function (LoF) mutations of FUBP1 in low-grade gliomas (37 events), (ii) in FUBP1 siRNA knockdown in U87MG cells (109 events) and (iii) LoF mutations of other splicing factors (433) were extracted from Seiler et al. 1 Junction lengths comprise the upstream intron, the skipped exon and the downstream intron. A two-tailed Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to assess statistical significance.

## Mutations in FUBP1 in cancer patients

We searched multiple databases to identify disease-related mutations within the FUBP1 gene. We focused on the minimal binding interface to U2AF2 (FUBP1 amino acids 25-56) to find mutations that potentially abolish the interaction with the U2AF2 RRM2 domain. The following databases were used: ICGC Data Portal, 137 cBioPortal, 138,139 Exac, 140 Cosmic, 141 GDC Data Portal, 142 gnomAD, 140 and ClinVar. 143 All cancer-related mutations in FUBP1 in the observed region and the underlying cancer type are listed in Figure S4B.

## Scoring of splice site features

3 0 and 5 0 splice site strength was scored with MaxEnt scan. 144 Py tract strength was determined as follows: a 39-nt region upstream of the AG dinucleotide at the 3' splice site was screened with sliding windows of increasing length (width 5-30 nt) to identify the window with the highest Py tract strength. The Py tract strength of each window was calculated as the X 2 test statistic with 1 degree of freedom, comparing the observed number of pyrimidines with the expected number based on the assumption of a uniform nucleotide distribution. In addition, candidate Py tracts were required to end within 10 nt upstream of the AG dinucleotide. Using this approach, the median length of identified Py tracts was 16 nt. BP strength was assessed according to the U2 binding energy, that is, the number of hydrogen bonds between the candidate sequences and the BP binding sequences in the U2 snRNA. Hydrogen bonds form between A:T (2 bonds), G:C (2 bonds), and G:U (1 bond; in fact also 2 bonds, but punished for being a wobble base pair) with the BP nucleotide bulging out and being omitted from the pairings. The Vienna RNA package v2.4.17 113 (RNAduplex) was used to determine the optimal hybridization structure between U2 snRNA sequences (GUGUAGUA) and the motif (position /C0 5 to +3, excluding the BP nucleotide). Predicted binding energy was the determined sum of hydrogen bonds forming between complementary motifs and U2 snRNA nucleotides.

## Evolutionary analyses

We annotated the domain architecture of FUBP1 using the function annoFAS provided in the FAS package 106 (https://github.com/ BIONF/FAS). The domain architecture-aware phylogenetic profile of FUBP1 across 174 mammals, 274 non-mammalian vertebrates, 277 invertebrates, 410 fungal species, 94 protozoa, and 145 plants was generated with the targeted ortholog search tool fDOG (https://github.com/BIONF/fDOG) 145 using the human FUBP1 (UniProt: Q96AE4) as a seed. fDOG was run with the options --minDist class, --maxDist phylum, -checkCoorthologsRef, and --countercheck. Homo sapiens (GenBank: GCF000001405) served as the reference taxon. Intron length and GC content information was extracted based on the respective gff and fasta files downloaded from NCBI RefSeq Genome. Intron length estimates and motif searches were performed in R v4.0.5. A/B box presence in the human proteome was determined as follows: in brief, we used the shell command grep to search for the regular expression "[ST][AK][QA]W..YY[RK]" in 19,519 human proteins encoded in the NCBI RefSeq Genome assembly GCF\_000001405.39. The resulting three hits were NCBI: XP\_011540693.1 (FUBP1, 2 motif instances), NCBI: NP\_003925.1 (FUBP3, 1 motif instance), and NCBI: NP\_001353228.1 (KHSRP, 3 motif instances). For counting FUBP1 motif occurrences across species, intron definitions were extracted for all the species investigated and motifs were counted in a 25-nt window located 25 nt upstream of the 3 0 splice site.

## Analysis of RBP crosslinking to snRNAs

In vivo iCLIP data from FUBP1, U2AF, SF1, SF3B1, and PTB was remapped to a custom database consisting of snRNAs, tRNAs, and rRNAs using STAR v2.7.3a. 107 Specifically, RNU1-1, RNU2-1, RNU4-1, RNU6-1, RNU5D-1, RNU7-1, RNU11, RNU12, RNU4ATAC, and RNU6ATAC were included. tRNA coordinates were retrieved from GtRNAdb (data release 19). "hg38-tRNAs.fasta", containing 429 high-confidence tRNA annotations, was downloaded. Because tRNAs are quite similar when stratified on their carried amino acid, one representative tRNA was selected per amino acid (tRNA with "1-1" in the name). In summary, this resulted in 22 tRNAs. Finally, the following rRNAs were added: 12S\_gi, 16S\_gi, 18S\_gi, 28S\_gi, 5.8S\_gi, and 5S\_gi. Mapping steps were performed as follows: all sequences were furnished with one additional base upstream of the sequence with the rationale of being able to display iCLIP coverage of reads starting directly at the 5' end of the sequence. tRNAs and snRNAs were furnished with the actual base upstream of the sequence. rRNAs were furnished with an "N". Reads were mapped per replicate with STAR v2.7.3a using the settings described above for in vivo iCLIP samples. Few reads were mapped to the minus strand and thus removed. Uniquely mapping reads were subjected to duplicate removal based on identical UMIs (--method unique) using UMI-tools v1.0.0. 146 Based on the remaining reads, iCLIP coverage profiles were exported as well as count tables containing the number of reads overlapping the genomic ranges of the defined RNAs.

## Subnuclear distribution of FUBP1-bound genes

The subnuclear spatial distribution for introns in HeLa cells was taken from Tammer et al. 64 , in which Chrom3D, a 3D genomemodeling tool that integrates 3DHi-C data and ChIP-seq data was used to assign distances from the nuclear center for topologically associated domains. The distance from the nuclear center is described by five concentric radial scopes where 1-to-5 point to the center-periphery axis. Our in vivo iCLIP data from SF3B1, FUBP1, and U2AF2 was then overlaid with the reported introns and the percentage of bound introns was counted. Enrichment was calculated as the percentage of bound introns in each radial scope compared to the first.

## Mathematical modeling

## Topology of the exon definition model

Splicing reactions are catalyzed by the spliceosome, which recognizes splice site sequences and forms a catalytically active higherorder complex across introns. To model this process, we considered that human spliceosomes frequently operate by a so-called "exon definition" mechanism, in which the pioneering spliceosome subunits U1 and U2 cooperatively bind to splice sites flanking an exon before the final cross-intron complex is formed during spliceosome maturation. 86 Because the initial binding of U1 and U2 plays a decisive role in splicing decisions, 86 we model only the initial exon definition step and assume the corresponding binding patterns determine splicing outcomes, as described below.

In the model pre-mRNA, none of the three exons are bound ("defined") by the spliceosome (white boxes), therefore this state is denoted "P0\_0\_0" (Figure S7F) with the notation "\_" indicating the presence of an intron. In the model, the pre-mRNA (P0\_0\_0) is synthesized at a constant rate s . The spliceosome can bind reversibly to each of the exons with on-rates k 1, k 2, and k 3. For instance, from P0\_0\_0 we can obtain P1\_0\_0, P0\_1\_0, and P0\_0\_1 through binding to the first, second, and third exon, respectively. Subsequent binding is possible; for example, P1\_0\_1 can be generated from P1\_0\_0 with the rate constant k 3. In total, there are eight spliceosomal binding states, including the fully bound state (P1\_1\_1), in which all exons are defined. All binding reactions are assumed to be reversible, i.e., k 4, k 5, and k 6 are the dissociation rate constants and the reverse of k 1, k 2, and k 3, respectively. For example, in state P1\_1\_0, spliceosome dissociation from exon 1 with the rate constant k 4 yields the species P0\_1\_0.

Depending on the exon definition states, splicing decisions are made, and irreversible splicing reactions are possible. For a splicing event to occur, we consider that both exons flanking a future splice junction must be defined. For instance, skipping of exon 2 is possible from P1\_0\_1 and occurs with the rate constant i 12. Likewise, splicing of the first intron occurs from the species P1\_1\_0 and P1\_1\_1 (rate constant i 1), and splicing of the second intron from P0\_1\_1 and P1\_1\_1 (rate constant i 2). The inclusion isoform is generated in two steps, that is, from the subsequent removal of introns 1 and 2 in random order: from the binding state P1\_1\_1, intron splicing generates two alternative intermediates in which either of the introns is already spliced (P1\_11 or P11\_1) and the retained intron can be further spliced in a subsequent reaction. Splicing of the partially defined species P1\_1\_0 and P0\_1\_1 yields the species P11\_0 and P0\_11; in these, the spliceosome can further reversibly bind exons 3 and 1, respectively, and undergo a second splicing reaction toward inclusion. In the model, all terminal splice products are subject to degradation ( k incl , degradation rate constant of inclusion; k skip, skipping; k dr1 , first intron retention; k dr2, second intron retention). The degradation rate constant of the full intron retention isoform is the sum of k dr1 and k dr2, reflecting that either intron may contain a destabilizing premature stop codon. Model species that can be bound or spliced further (P0\_0\_0, P1\_0\_0, P0\_1\_0, P0\_0\_1, P1\_1\_0, P1\_0\_1, P0\_1\_1, P1\_1\_1, P0\_11, P1\_11, P11\_0, P11\_1) are not subject to degradation, but they can be exported from the nucleus with the rate constant k ret. This reaction reflects that there is a limited time window for splicing to occur, the intermediates otherwise being terminally frozen in the corresponding intron retention state. The ordinary differential equations of the model are given in Table S4.

Because a subset of human genes are spliced by an intron definition mechanism, we also considered this scenario in a modified version of our splicing model. In contrast to the exon definition model, the 5 0 and 3 0 splice sites of an exon can be bound independently of one another in the intron definition model. Furthermore, splicing of an intron is possible as soon as both splice sites flanking this intron are defined. Hence, definition of two splice sites is sufficient for splicing to occur, whereas in the exon definition model four splice sites need to be defined (3 0 and 5 0 splice sites of the two flanking exons). For the intron definition model, we use a notation for binding state similar to that for exon definition. For instance, for consistency, we assigned the state in which no spliceosome component is bound as P0\_0\_0. For spliceosome binding to exons 1 and 3, we again considered a single binding reaction, as only the splice sites flanking the intron of interest are relevant for splicing. Hence, a transition from "0" to "1" in the first position (e.g., P0\_0\_0 to P1\_0\_0) represents a spliceosome binding state downstream of exon 1 (5' of the first intron), and "0" to "1" in the third position indicates binding upstream of exon 3 (3' of the second intron). For exon 2, we treat splice-site binding as two separate events. We use "0" to denote no binding, "a" for upstream binding (e.g., P0\_a\_0), "b" for downstream binding (e.g., P0\_b\_0), and "1" for both U2 and U1 being simultaneously bound (e.g., P0\_1\_0). Again, the presence or absence of "\_" indicates whether or not the intron is removed. Weadopted the same parameter notation, that is, k 1/ k 4 and k 3/ k 6 to describe binding/dissociation at exons 1 and 3, respectively. The newparameters k 2a/ k 5a (upstream) and k 2b/ k 5b (downstream) were introduced to represent spliceosome binding/dissociation around exon 2. There are a total of 16 spliceosomal binding states in the intron definition model, with the following additional states not part of the exon definition model: P0\_a\_0, P0\_b\_0, P1\_a\_0, P1\_b\_0, P0\_a\_1, P0\_b\_1, P1\_a\_1, and P1\_b\_1. If both splice sites flanking a future splice junction are defined, splicing decisions, implemented as irreversible splicing reactions in the model, can occur. Skipping of exon 2 is possible from P1\_0\_1 and occurs with the rate i 12. Splicing of the first intron occurs from species P1\_a\_0, P1\_1\_0,

P1\_a\_1, and P1\_1\_1 (rate i 1), and splicing of the second intron occurs from P0\_b\_1, P0\_1\_1, P1\_b\_1, and P1\_1\_1 (rate i 2). The inclusion isoform is generated in two steps: first, intron 1 or 2 is spliced from P1\_1\_1, generating P1\_11 or P11\_1, respectively. Second, the retained intron can be further spliced in a subsequent reaction. Splicing of the partially defined species P1\_a\_0, P1\_1\_0, P0\_b\_1, and P0\_1\_1 yields the species P1a\_0, P11\_0, P0\_b1, and P0\_11, respectively. To these, the spliceosome can bind further reversibly with the association rate constants k 1, k 2a, k 2, and k 3 (depending on the site of binding), and if the species P1\_11 or P11\_1 are formed, a second splicing reaction toward inclusion can occur. All terminal splice products are subject to degradation, for which we adopted the same assumptions and notation as for the exon definition model. Again, model species that can be bound or spliced further (P0\_0\_0, P1\_0\_0, P0\_a\_0, P0\_b\_0, P0\_1\_0, P0\_0\_1, P1\_1\_0, P1\_a\_0, P1\_b\_0, P1\_0\_1, P0\_a\_1, P0\_b\_1, P0\_1\_1, P1\_a\_1, P1\_b\_1, P1\_1\_1) can be exported from the nucleus with the rate constant k ret. The ordinary differential equations of the model are given in Table S4.

## Model simulation and analysis

The differential equations were implemented in Matlab 2020b and solved using ode15s. To analyze splicing outcomes, we assumed a steady state, and performed numerical simulations over long time periods ( t = 1,000,000 min) to ensure that the concentrations of the model species remained constant. Thus, we consider an RNA sequencing experiment, in which gene expression was measured in a stationary cell population in the absence of any external perturbation. As a measure of splicing outcome, we used the steady-state concentrations of inclusion and skipping (see also below).

## Genome-wide splicing modeling by parameter sampling

The exon definition model consists of 15 kinetic parameters which belong to the following classes of reactions: spliceosome binding ( k 1, k 2a, k 2b, k 3), spliceosome dissociation ( k 4, k 5a, k 5b, k 6), splicing catalysis ( i 1, i 2, i 12), and others, which are rates of pre-mRNA synthesis ( s ), mRNA degradation ( k int , k skip , k dr1 , k dr2 ), and terminal intron retention ( k ret). The values of these parameters were unknown and likely greatly differ between exons in the human genome. To mimic the heterogeneity of exons in the human genome and to assess the robustness of our simulation results, we randomly sampled all kinetic parameters in our model 10,000 times. As a reference parameter set, all parameter values were set to 1, except for k ret , k incl, and k skip, which were set to 0.01 to ensure low levels of intron retention that are typically observed in RNA sequencing datasets. We sampled each parameter in the model within a +/-sevenfold range around this reference using Latin hypercube sampling (lhsdesign command in Matlab). We performed simulations for each parameter realization and calculated PSI = inclusion / (inclusion + skipping) as a measure of alternative splicing. We obtained a PSI distribution between 0 and 1 that closely resembled the experimentally measured genome-wide PSI in control cells. The same procedure was applied for intron definition, with the only difference being the number of parameters involved -17 in this case. These kinetic parameters belong to the following classes of reactions: spliceosome binding ( k 1, k 2a, k 2b, k 3) and spliceosome dissociation ( k 4, k 5a, k 5b, k 6); the remainder are identical to those used for exon definition.

## Modeling FUBP1 knockout effects

To reproduce the FUBP1 KOdata, we implemented two distinct assumptions about the mechanism of action of FUBP1: that FUBP1 affects late spliceosomal catalysis (i.e., the rate constants i 1, i 2 and/or i 12), or that FUBP1 affects early spliceosomal binding (i.e., the rate constants k 1k 6). For both mechanistic assumptions, we considered that FUBP1 predominantly binds long introns (Figure 6A). Whensimulating the effect FUBP1 KOhasonsplicing catalysis (model 2 in Figure 6A), we assumed that the splicing of short introns is unaffected, but that KO selectively reduces the splicing rate for the excision of long introns 3.5-fold compared to control. To reflect different combinations of long and short introns, we considered three scenarios in the FUBP1 KOsimulations: (i) for the simulation of cassette exons flanked by two long introns, we assumed that the FUBP1 KOslowsall three splicing reactions in the model, that is, the excision of intron 1, excision of intron 2 and exon skipping ( i 1, i 2, and i 12 are changed). (ii) For exons flanked by one short and one long intron, it was assumed that the splicing rate of the short intron is unaffected by FUBP1 KO, whereas splicing rates of the long intron and skipping are reduced. The long intron was either considered to be located upstream of the alternative exon (ii.a: i 1 and i 12 are changed) or downstream (ii.b: i 2 and i 12 are changed). In either case, the skipping reaction was considered as an FUBP1-dependent, long-range splicing event and was therefore perturbed in the FUBP1 KO simulation ( i 12 is changed). (iii) The third hypothetical scenario, in which an alternative exon is flanked by two short introns, was not explicitly considered in our simulations, as the model would predict no PSI change upon FUBP1 KOin this case. For each parameter sample (hypothetical exon), the KO scenarios i, ii.a, and ii.b were implemented separately, resulting in three sets of 10,000 KO simulations. For each of these, the PSI changes upon FUBP1 KO were calculated [ D PSI = PSI(KO) - PSI(control)], and the corresponding D PSI distribution (Figure 6B) agrees well with the experimental observation in RNA sequencing experiments. In the alternative FUBP1 KO implementation (model 1 in Figure 6A), we assumed that FUBP1 promotes initial U2 binding to the 3 0 splice site. Because the 3 0 splice site marks the downstream end of an intron, we assume that the FUBP1 KO reduces spliceosome binding to exons located downstream of long introns. In our model, a long intron 1, therefore, results in a reduced exon 2 definition rate upon FUBP1 KO( k 2 changed 1.7-fold compared to control). Likewise, a long intron 2 diminishes exon 3 definition ( k 3 changed 1.7-fold upon FUBP1 KO). These perturbations were implemented alone (one long and one short intron), or in combination (two long introns), and the corresponding D PSI distributions across all 10,000 parameter realizations are shown in Figure 6B. The perturbation in binding parameters ( k 2, k 3) was chosen to be smaller (1.7-fold) than the effect on splicing parameters (3.5-fold, model described above) to adjust for similar-sized effects on splicing in both implementations. In contrast to the FUBP1 KO RNA sequencing data, these spliceosome binding simulations predict opposite PSI changes for short introns being located upstream or downstream of the alternative exon. Hence, a model in which FUBP1 enhances the catalytic excision of long introns explains the FUBP1 KOdatabetter when compared to a model in which FUBP1 primarily helps to recruit the pioneering U2 subunit to the 3 0 splice site. The same FUBP1 KOsimulations were also implemented in the intron definition scenario. Here, the effect of FUBP1 on spliceosome binding (model 1 in Figure 6A) was assumed to affect the k 2a parameter for a long upstream intron and k 3 for long downstream introns. If both introns are long, FUBP1 influences both k 2a and k 3. The effect of FUBP1 on splicing catalysis (model 2 in Figure 6A) in the intron definition model was implemented in the same way as described above for the exon definition model. For FUBP1-based mechanisms of action, that is, binding and catalysis effects, very similar results were observed for the intron and exon definition scenarios (Figure S7G). Hence, the model's prediction that FUBP1 affects splicing catalysis is robust and does not depend on the mechanism of splicing decision making.