## The mitochondrial mRNA-stabilizing protein SLIRP regulates skeletal muscle mitochondrial structure and respiration by exercise-recoverable mechanisms

Decline in mitochondrial function is linked to decreased muscle mass and strength in conditions like sarcopenia and type 2 diabetes. Despite therapeutic opportunities, there is limited and equivocal data regarding molecular cues controlling muscle mitochondrial plasticity. Here we uncovered that the mitochondrial mRNA-stabilizing protein SLIRP, in complex with LRPPRC, is a PGC-1 α target that regulates mitochondrial structure, respiration, and mtDNAencoded-mRNA pools in skeletal muscle. Exercise training effectively counteracts mitochondrial defects caused by genetically-induced LRPPRC/SLIRP loss, despite sustained low mtDNA-encoded-mRNA pools, by increasing mitoribosome translation capacity and mitochondrial quality control. In humans, exercise training robustly increases muscle SLIRP and LRPPRC protein across exercise modalities and sexes, yet less prominently in individuals with type 2 diabetes. SLIRP muscle loss reduces Drosophila lifespan. Our data points to a mechanism of post-transcriptional mitochondrial regulation in muscle via mitochondrial mRNA stabilization, offering insights into how exercise enhances mitoribosome capacity and mitochondrial quality control to alleviate defects.

Mitochondrial homeostasis and function are vital for skeletal muscle physiology, primarily in /uniFB02 uenced by the ability to meet energy demands through oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in mitochondria 1 . A decline in mitochondrial function is associated with decreased muscle mass and strength in multiple conditions, including sarcopenia, type 2 diabetes (T2D), and cancer. Reduced muscle function adversely impacts health and quality of life 1 -9 and is associated with increased all-cause mortality. Mounting evidence suggests that improvements in mitochondrial metabolism contribute to the exercise-induced functional bene /uniFB01 ts, as mitochondrial preservation protects against the age-associated decline in skeletal muscle mass and performance 10,11 . The bene /uniFB01 cial effects of exercise training are more potent than any drug in preserving muscle mass and function, positioning exercise training as a frontline strategy for the prevention and treatment of sarcopenia, T2D, and cancer 12 -14 . Viewing mitochondrial control through the lens of exercise biology is a strategy to gain new mechanistic insights into mitochondrial regulation, which is currently incompletely understood. With an aging population and no FDA/EMAapproved drugs to treat muscle functional decline, there is an urgent unmet need to identify potential treatment targets.

OXPHOS proteins are of dual origin and transcribed in spatially distinct cellular compartments. Nuclear (n)DNA encodes for the majority of OXPHOS proteins. Yet, 13 essential OXPHOS proteins are encoded by the small circular high-copy number mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 15,16 . In non-muscle systems, a protein complex comprised of steroid receptor RNA activator stem-loop interacting RNA-binding protein (SLIRP) and the leucine-rich pentatricopeptide repeat containing protein (LRPPRC) mediates mitochondrial-mRNA (mt-mRNA)

stability and polyadenylation of most mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS transcripts 17 -21 . SLIRP and LRPPRC, encoded by nuclear DNA, are primarily targeted to mitochondria. In addition, SLIRP may also regulate nuclear receptors by binding to steroid receptor RNA activator 22 , and LRPPRCmayactivate nuclear genes through interaction with PGC-1 α 23 . Stabilization of mt-mRNA is critical for protein synthesis by the mitochondrial ribosome (mitoribosome). Yet, the mitoribosome comprises 82 mitoribosomal proteins encoded by nuclear genes, and 12S and 16S rRNAs, highlighting the requirement for intricate coordination between the processes of cytosolic and mitochondrial protein synthesis 18,19 .

Despite the high mitochondrial abundance in skeletal muscle, the complex interaction between LRPPRC/SLIRP-mediated posttranscriptional processes, mitoribosomal translation, and mitochondrial function has not previously been studied in skeletal muscle. Elucidating the underlying mechanisms for stabilizing mt-mRNA could not only facilitate our understanding of the fundamental energy metabolism in muscle, but also aid intervention strategies for diseases associated with skeletal muscle mitochondrial defects.

Endurance exercise training potently increases mitochondrial massinskeletalmuscle, inpartdue to the increased synthesis of nDNA -and mtDNA -encoded mitochondrial proteins 1,24 . Importantly, exercise training retains its ability to improve oxidative capacity not only in healthy individuals but also in patients with mtDNA mutations, with common PGC-1 α -mediated mitochondrial adaptive responses shared between both groups 13 . These results suggest that exercise training induces adaptations to reinforce the mitochondria ' s ability to ef /uniFB01 -ciently respond to increased energy demands, even in the presence of mtDNA mutations, which may negatively affect mitochondrial transcription and translation. However, a notable knowledge gap persists in understanding the role of mitochondrial posttranscriptional processes, speci /uniFB01 cally in mt-mRNA stabilization and translation, in skeletal muscle biology and following exercise training. Yet, that knowledge is needed to gain a comprehensive understanding of the adaptive responses to exercise training.

Since SLIRP, a key player in mitochondrial posttranscriptional gene expression, is markedly upregulated in mouse skeletal muscle by exercise training 25 , we hypothesized that SLIRP would regulate mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle at rest and in response to exercise training. Our /uniFB01 ndings illuminate SLIRP´s role in regulating mtmRNA transcript levels in skeletal muscle, downstream of PGC-1 α 1. Knockout(KO)ofSLIRPledtodamagedandfragmentedmitochondria alongside lowered respiration. Intriguingly, exercise training could compensate for the absence of SLIRP, leading to improvements in mitochondrial integrity and respiratory capacity. Our /uniFB01 ndings imply the activation of complex exercise-induced molecular signaling in skeletal muscle which bypasses mt-mRNA defects, possibly through enhanced mitoribosomal translation and capacity of mitochondrial quality control.

## Results

## SLIRP controls mt-mRNA levels and respiration in muscle

Protein pro /uniFB01 ling of /uniFB01 ve different skeletal muscle tissues showed that SLIRP content was highest in the oxidative soleus compared to glycolytic extensor digitorum longus (EDL, Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1A), in accordance with the potential critical role for SLIRP in oxidation. Moreover, SLIRP was present across a diverse array of tissues in mice and was highly abundant in energy-demanding tissues such as liver, kidney, brown adipose tissue, heart, and skeletal muscle (Fig. 1A, Supplementary Fig. 1A), in line with previously reported Slirp mRNA levels 22 .

In skeletal muscle of global Slirp KO mice, SLIRP protein was undetectable. Moreover, SLIRP´s binding partner LRPPRC showed 90% reduction in protein content (Fig. 1B), indicative of their costabilization. To con /uniFB01 rm co-stabilization, we administered intramuscular injections of recombinant adeno-associated viral serotype 6 (rAAV6): Slirp into the tibialis anterior (TA) muscle of wild-type (WT) mice, while injecting a control vector into the contralateral TA muscle. As expected, in the absence of injecting vectors to concomitantly upregulate LRPPRC, total SLIRP protein content did not increase because endogenous SLIRP protein was degraded (Fig. 1C). These /uniFB01 ndings show that SLIRP and LRPPRC stabilize each other in skeletal muscle, aligning with /uniFB01 ndings from non-muscle tissue 17,18,20 .

Wenext determined the role of SLIRP for mitochondrial structure in skeletal muscle, using the membrane potential probe, tetramethylrhodamine ethyl ester (TMRE+), in intact /uniFB02 exor digitorum brevis (FDB) muscle /uniFB01 bers of Slirp KOand littermate control wild-type (WT) mice. Interestingly, the /uniFB01 nely interconnected mitochondrial network, obvious in WT /uniFB01 bers, was disrupted in Slirp KOmuscle /uniFB01 bers, evident by a 30% increased mitochondrial fragmentation index (Fig. 1D). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of gastrocnemius muscle provided further insights into the ultrastructural changes of mitochondrial morphology in Slirp KO (Fig. 1E). Half of the Slirp KO gastrocnemius muscles displayed reduced density of the matrix, disarray of the cristae, and substantial enlargement and vacuolation of intermyo /uniFB01 brillar (IMF) mitochondria (Fig. 1E). Quantitative analysis of the mitochondria showed that the percentage of damaged IMF mitochondria was increased (Fig. 1F). However, there werenosigni /uniFB01 cant alterations in the total number of IMF mitochondria (Fig. 1G). The percentage of damaged mitochondria in Slirp KOmuscle varied between 2 -20% of total mitochondria compared to &lt;2% of damaged mitochondria in WT muscle (Fig. 1E, F). Other structural parameters of IMF mitochondria, such as mitochondrial area, aspect ratio, elongation, convexity, perimeter, sphericity, and diameter did not display any signi /uniFB01 cant changes in Slirp KO muscles, likely due to heterogeneity in the extent of damage (Fig. 1F, Supplementary Fig. 1B -H).

In agreement with the observable abnormalities in mitochondrial structure, respiratory capacity was reduced in permeabilized gastrocnemius muscle /uniFB01 bers of Slirp KOmicecomparedto WT (Fig. 1H). This was particularly evident when adding glutamate to assess complex I linked respiratory activity ( -24%) and succinate to assess complex I + II linked respiratory capacity ( -21%). These results indicate an important role for SLIRP selectively in skeletal muscle respiration, as in isolated mitochondria from liver and heart tissues, Slirp KO did not compromise mitochondrial respiration 18 . In agreement with lower respiration, fatty acid oxidation tended ( p =0.0718) to be lower in intact incubated soleus muscle of Slirp KO mice (Fig. 1I). However, electrically-induced muscle contraction increased fatty acid oxidation similarly in both genotypes, suggesting that fatty acid utilization for fuel during muscle contraction does not depend on SLIRP (Fig. 1I).

With the suggested role of SLIRP as an mt-mRNA stabilizing protein in non-muscle cells 18 , we determined mtDNA-encoded mRNA transcripts. Intriguingly, we observed a 60 -80% reduction in mt-Nd1 , mt-Nd5/Nd6 (Complex I), mt-CytB (Complex III), mt-Co1 (Complex IV), and mt-Atp6 (ATP synthase) in gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 1J) with concomitant reductions in protein content for MTCO1 and MTATP6. Additionally, there was an increased mtDNA copy number, estimated by measuring Nd1 and Nd6 (Fig. 1K). Those results indicate that SLIRP stabilizes mt-mRNA, and its loss adversely affects MTCO1 and MTATP6 protein content in skeletal muscle.

Together, these results suggest that mt-mRNA stabilization via SLIRP is required for proper mitochondrial network structure and morphology, and respiration in mouse muscle.

## SLIRP regulates locomotion and lifespan in /uniFB02 ies

To determine the long-term consequences of SLIRP muscle de /uniFB01 ciency on the whole organism, we utilized the UAS-GAL4 system 26 for musclespeci /uniFB01 c ( Mef2 -GAL4&gt;) knock-down (KD) of SLIRP1 and SLIRP2 in Drosophila (D.) melanogaster . Only one SLIRP gene is present in mouse and speci /uniFB01 c SLIRP de /uniFB01 ciency, irrespective of orthologue, had a deleterious effect on lifespan. While the median survival of control /uniFB02 ies was 77 days, median survival of SLIRP1 and SLIRP2 KD /uniFB02 ies was only 55 and 63 days, respectively, and accordingly both SLIRP1 and SLIRP2 KD signi /uniFB01 cantly reduced lifespan (Fig. 1M).

Taken together these /uniFB01 ndings show that SLIRP KD can have detrimental long-term consequences such as impaired muscle function, starvation intolerance, and reduced life span.

## PGC-1 α 1 regulates training-induced muscle SLIRP protein

Having established critical functional roles of SLIRP in skeletal muscle mitochondrial morphology and respiratory capacity with detrimental effects on lifespan, we next investigated the upstream regulation of SLIRP protein content. Our recent work pinpointed SLIRP as a protein responsive to exercise training 25 ; yet the mechanisms governing its induction and functions remained elusive. Knowing that exercise potently increases PGC-1 α protein and mRNA levels in both mouse and human skeletal muscle 31 -34 , and that PGC-1 α is an important regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, respiration, and quality control 35 , we explored the regulation of SLIRP by PGC-1 α . The Ppargc1a gene encodes several PGC-1 α isoforms, including isoform 1 (PGC-1 α 1) and isoform 4 (PGC-1 α 4), with distinct regulation and biological functions 36,37 . Overexpression (OE) of PGC-1 α 1 in mouse skeletal muscle 36,38 , associating with endurance exercise training-like adaptations 36,38,39 , resulted in approximately 8.3-fold higher muscle SLIRP protein content, without a concomitant change in Slirp mRNA levels (Fig. 2A). On the contrary, PGC-1 α 4 OE 40 , inducing resistancetype exercise training adaptations such as muscle hypertrophy and strength 36 , had no effect on SLIRP protein content in mouse gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 2B). This suggests that SLIRP is an unrecognized player in PGC-1 α 1-regulated oxidative metabolism.

To test whether PGC-1 α regulates Slirp mRNA in skeletal muscle following exercise, we determined Slirp and Ppargc1a (Exon 3 -5) mRNAlevels in TA muscle 3 h into recovery from one exercise bout in mice lacking PGC-1 α in skeletal muscle (PGC-1 α mKO) and WT control littermates. Slirp mRNA was not upregulated 3 h post-exercise (Fig. 2C), in contrast to the expected 34 increase in Ppargc1a (+6.8fold; Fig. 2C) in WT mice. Interestingly, Slirp mRNA levels were only modestly 14% reduced in PGC-1 α KO skeletal muscle (Fig. 2C), in line with the dissociation between Slirp mRNA levels and SLIRP protein levels observed in PGC-1 α 1 OE skeletal muscle (Fig. 2A).

These /uniFB01 ndings align with reports describing only moderate correlations between mRNA and protein levels following exercise 41 -43 . Yet, with the interpretative limitations of a single post-exercise time point, weaimedtoacquire a more detailed record of the temporal changes in Slirp transcripts in recovery from exercise. We subjected WT mice to female: WT, n =4/4; Slirp KO, n =5/5); ○ (blue) male, ◇ (red) female. I Fatty acid oxidation in isolated Slirp KO and WT soleus muscle at rest and in response to contraction (male/female: WT, n =3/4; Slirp KO, n =4/8); ○ (blue) male, ◇ (red) female. J RT-qPCR analysis of mitochondrial transcript levels and corresponding immunoblots in gastrocnemius of male Slirp KO and WT mice (mRNA: WT, n =6; Slirp KO, n =6; protein: WT, n =6; Slirp KO, n =7). K qPCR analysis of mtDNA levels in male Slirp KO and WT mice (WT, n =6; Slirp KO, n =7). L , M Climbing assay and life span of control, SLIRP1 and SLIRP2 knockdown /uniFB02 ies ( n =3 -9, 10 /uniFB02 ies per sample for climbing assay; n =10, 10 /uniFB02 ies per vial for lifespan assay). Data are shown as mean±SEM, including individual values, where applicable. Geno, main effect of genotype; substrate, main effect of substrate addition; Substrate X Geno, interaction between genotype and substrate; Contraction, main effect of contraction. * p &lt;0.05, ** p &lt;0.01, *** p &lt;0.001, as per Two-tailed Mann Whitney test ( D , F , G ) on average values, Two-way RM ANOVA with Š ídák ' s multiple comparisons test ( H , I ), Two-tailed unpaired Student´st test ( J , K ), ordinary one-way ANOVA with Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test ( L ), Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test ( M ). Source data are provided as a Source Data /uniFB01 le.

an acute exercise bout at 60% of their maximal running capacity and harvested quadriceps muscles at rest, immediately after, 2 h, 6 h, and 24 h post-exercise. We found that Slirp mRNA levels were 1.4-fold elevated 6 h into the recovery period in quadriceps muscle (Fig. 2D). This is a time-point not included in our prior cohort (Fig. 2C), and partially concurrent with Ppargc1a mRNAlevels that were elevated 2 h (+3.0-fold) and 6 h post-exercise (+ 3.3-fold; Fig. 2D). Concomitant with Slirp and Ppargc1a mRNA levels, mtDNA-encoded mt-Nd1 mRNA transcripts were increased 1.5-fold 6 h post-exercise, but not mt-Cox1 , mt-Cox2 , and mt-Atp6 (Fig. 2E). These results indicate a coordinated regulatory mechanism linking SLIRP, PGC-1a and the simultaneous upregulation of mt-Nd1 mRNA transcripts.

Since SLIRP is a nuclear-encoded protein primarily targeted to mitochondria by a speci /uniFB01 c signal sequence, we next determined if muscle contractions increased the mitochondrial localization of SLIRP in cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions. To investigate this, we investigated quadriceps muscles from WT mice 2 h after electricallyinduced in situ contraction, using the contralateral leg muscle as a rested control, and performed an adapted subcellular fractionation assay on frozen tissue 44,45 to isolate cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions. COX4 protein was used as mitochondrial marker, and GAPDH as cytosolic marker, respectively, to assess the purity of the fractions.

Onawhole-tissue lysate level, SLIRP protein remained unchanged in response to contraction (Fig. 2F). SLIRP protein content tended to be 1.2-fold and 1.3-fold enriched in the cytosolic and mitochondrial fraction, respectively, following in situ muscle contraction (Fig. 2F), indicating that muscle contractions increase protein synthesis in the cytosolic and mitochondrial localization of SLIRP. Interestingly, and withthesamesampleinput,wewereabletodetectSLIRPproteininthe cytosolic fraction, indicating that SLIRP may not be exclusive to mitochondria in skeletal muscle. These data suggest that muscle contraction elicits a subcellular redistribution of SLIRP towards the mitochondria.

Given that SLIRP might be regulated by PGC-1 α , we next turned to investigate the long-term dependency of exercise training-induced regulation of SLIRP protein by PGC-1 α . In contrast to acute exercise, exercise training increased SLIRP protein content 4.8-fold in WT mice (Fig. 2G), recapitulating our earlier observations in mice engaged in voluntary wheel running 25 . The effect of exercise training on SLIRP protein content was markedly blunted by 70% in mice lacking PGC-1 α in muscle compared to trained WT mice (Fig. 2G). Expectedly, in WT mice, exercise training potently upregulated the steady-state levels of multiple OXPHOS proteins including SDHB, UQCRC2, and MTCO1 in skeletal muscle (Supplementary Fig. 1I -K). In mice lacking PGC-1 α in muscle, SDHB (Supplementary Fig. 1I) and MTCO1 protein (Supplementary Fig. 1K) was 50 -60% reduced in sedentary (SED) mice.

PGC-1 α has marked effects on muscle endurance, partially attributed to its pivotal role in mitochondrial biogenesis, and respiration 38,49 . Our results suggest SLIRP as an unrecognized downstream target of PGC-1a in such exercise adaptations and oxidative metabolism.

content in whole-quadriceps lysate, and SLIRP and COX4 protein content in cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions, isolated from WT quadriceps at rest and 2 h after in situ contraction ( n =4/group). G Western blot analysis of SLIRP protein abundance in quadriceps of sedentary (SED) and 12-week ET PGC-1 α mKOand WT mice (WT SED/ET, n =10/10; PGC-1 α mKOSED/ET, n =8/10). H Western blot analysis of SLIRP protein abundance in quadriceps of muscle-speci /uniFB01 c AMPK α 1 and α 2 double KO (mDKO) and WT mice treated with/without AICAR (WT, saline/AICAR, n =5/4; mDKO, saline/AICAR, n =6/7). Data are means ± SEM, including individual values. Geno, main effect of genotype; Ex, main effect of acute exercise; Geno x Ex, interaction between genotype and acute exercise. * p &lt;0.05, *** p &lt;0.001, as per Two-tailed unpaired Student´s t test ( A , B , F ), Two-way ANOVA with Š ídák ' s multiple comparisons test ( C , G , H ), and ordinary one-way ANOVA with Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test ( D , E ). Source data are provided as a Source Data /uniFB01 le.

## SLIRP dispensable for most adaptations to exercise training

Having identi /uniFB01 ed SLIRP as an exercise training responsive protein downstream of PGC-1a, we next determined SLIRP´s mechanistic involvement in exercise training-mediated organismal adaptations. To this end, we conducted a 10-week voluntary wheel-running training study in Slirp KOandWTlittermate miceof both sexes commencing at ~18 weeks of age. The experimental design is shown in Fig. 3A.

The daily running distance recorded over 6 weeks of the 10-week study was 2.4 km/day on average for male mice of both genotypes, whereas it was 4.8 km/day for female exercise-trained (ET) WT mice and 3.0 km/day for female KO ET mice (Fig. 3B). It is important to consider that the running distance observed in our study of 18-week old mice is shorter than those reported in other exercise training studies using ~ 10-week-old mice, which typically run 6 -8km/day on average 25,50,51 . Despite the higher food intake in ET mice (Fig. 3C), exercise training lowered body weight in both trained genotypes (Supplementary Fig. 2A). Moreover, irrespective of genotype, exercise training reduced fat mass/body weight ratio (Supplementary Fig. 2B) and increased lean mass/body weight ratio compared to sedentary (SED) groups (Supplementary Fig. 2C). Exercise training had no effect on gastrocnemius or TA muscle weight relative to tibia length in either sex (Supplementary Fig. 2D). However, we noted that female Slirp KO SED and both ET groups had elevated heart weight relative to WT SED (Supplementary Fig. 2D).

Exercise capacity increased similarly with exercise training, independently of genotype (+ 1.2-fold for WT ET, +1.3-fold for KO ET; Supplementary Fig. 2E) and sex (females shown in Supplementary Fig. 2G). Post-exercise blood lactate levels tended to be reduced (-1.7fold; p =0.067) by ET in WT male mice (Supplementary Fig. 2F). The training-induced lowering of blood lactate post-exercise was absent in male and female Slirp KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 2F, H).

Exercise training is a powerful preventative intervention against many metabolic disorders 12 , partially due to its remarkable effects in improving glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity documented in both animal models and humans 25,50,52 . Accordingly, male WT ET mice displayed reduced fasting blood glucose (Fig. 3D) and improved blood glucose control evidenced by a downshifted glucose response curve compared to WT SED mice. This effect was not observed in trained male Slirp KO mice (Fig. 3E). Thus, trained Slirp KO mice displayed similar glucose tolerance as both SED groups. The incremental area under the curve (iAUC) of blood glucose was similar between groups (Fig. 3F), suggesting that the lowered plasma glucose excursion during the GTT was driven by lower basal glucose levels. Yet, exercise training reduced the levels of plasma insulin in both WT and Slirp KO mice, suggesting that insulin sensitivity was increased by exercise training in both groups (Fig. 3G). There was no effect of exercise training or genotype on fasting glucose, glucose tolerance or insulin levels in female mice (Fig. 3H -K).

Our results demonstrate that SLIRP is largely dispensable for organismal adaptations to exercise training, yet, in male mice SLIRP is required for training-induced improvement in blood glucose regulation.

## Exercise training reverses Slirp KO mitochondrial defects

Exercise training can counteract mitochondrial damage, arising from excessive accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) or impaired assembly of OXPHOS complex following mtDNA mutations 11,13,53 -55 . As we established that loss of SLIRP had marked negative implications for mitochondrial structure and respiration in skeletal muscle (Fig. 1E -H), we asked whether exercise training could rescue these defects.

Skeletal muscle mitochondrial network structure was qualitatively investigated in TMRE+ stained FDB /uniFB01 bers by confocal microscopy. Remarkably, exercise training completely rescued the derangements in mitochondrial network structure and mitochondrial fragmentation observed in Slirp KO SED mice, quantitatively corroborated by restoration of the fragmentation index (Fig. 4A).

Concomitantly with improved mitochondrial structure, exercise training restored the respiratory /uniFB02 uxin Slirp KOmicetothelevelofWT muscle (Fig. 4B). WT mice did not improve respiratory /uniFB02 ux with exercise training, which was consistent with no effect of exercise training on fatty acid oxidation of contracting isolated WT soleus muscle (Supplementary Fig. 2I) and aligns with other studies 56,57 . Exercise training in Slirp KO mice improved fatty acid oxidation in contracting Slirp KO soleus muscles (Supplementary Fig. 2I), in alignment with improved respiratory /uniFB02 ux in Slirp KO muscles by exercise training. Thus, exercise training counteracted the structural alterations in Slirp KOSEDmiceand had a positive impact on mitochondrial respiratory capacity, suggesting restored mitochondrial function.

Together, these results support that exercise training exploits the remarkable adaptive plasticity that mitochondria retain even in the event of mitochondrial network disruptions and impaired respiratory /uniFB02 ux in skeletal muscle.

## Exercise training bypasses reduced mt transcript levels

We next aimed to investigate the molecular underpinnings for the defects in mitochondrial structure and function in Slirp KO and their correction by exercise training. We primarily focused our analyses on male mice, as our /uniFB01 ndings revealed a stronger propensity for adaptive response to exercise training in male Slirp KOmice.Thecorresponding analyses for female mice are included in Supplementary Fig. 3.

First, we veri /uniFB01 ed that both SLIRP (+ 1.2-fold) and concomitantly LRPPRC (+ 1.4-fold) were upregulated by exercise training in the gastrocnemius muscle in WT, but not Slirp KO mice (Fig. 4C). These /uniFB01 ndings reinforce the co-stabilizing relationship of SLIRP and LRPPRC not only at sedentary 17,18,20,58 but also during exercise trained conditions.

SLIRP, together with LRPPRC, has been shown to maintain mtmRNA stability and aid mitoribosomal translation in non-muscle tissues 17 -20,58 . Indeed, the marked downregulation of mt-mRNA transcripts in SED Slirp KO muscle, also shown in Fig. 1J, remained largely reduced in ET Slirp KO mice relative to WT ET mice (Fig. 4E). Visually, there appeared to be a partial rescue of mt-Nd5/6 and mt-Co1 in ET Slirp KO mice, though this observation was not statistically con /uniFB01 rmed. The sustained reduction in mt-mRNA transcripts upon Slirp KOis clearer in female mice, where exercise training signi /uniFB01 cantly increased mt-mRNA transcript levels in WT mice, a response completely abrogated in Slirp KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 3B). The differences in mt-mRNA transcript levels in response to exercise training between sexes are likely due to the variation in running volume, with female WT mice running twice as much as male WT mice (4.8 km/day vs. 2.4 km/day; Fig. 3B). In contrast, mtDNA copy number, measured using quantitative PCR and primers for mtNd1 (Supplementary Fig. 2J) or mt-Nd5/mt-Nd6 (Supplementary Fig. 2K), were unaltered across groups or elevated only in Slirp KOSEDmice.Thissuggests a compensatory response to mitigate muscle mitochondrial defects by increasing mtDNA copy number 59 or decreasing its degradation. Accordingly, these /uniFB01 ndings suggests that SLIRP is crucial for mitochondrial transcript stability in skeletal muscle. We were intrigued to /uniFB01 nd that exercise training still restored protein content of mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS subunits, MT-ND3, MT-CO1 and MT-ATP6 in Slirp KOmice (Fig. 4F). Thus, exercise training completely counteracted the sustained reduction in the mt-mRNA levels of these proteins in Slirp KO ET mice. Interestingly, exercise training markedly upregulated nuclear-encoded OXPHOS subunits SDHB (Complex II) and ATP5A (ATPase complex, also known as complex V) protein content in Slirp KO mice, both 1.4-fold more than in the trained WT mice (Fig. 4G). Other nuclear-encoded OXPHOS subunits, such as NDUFB8 (Complex I) and UQCRC2 (Complex III) also upregulated by exercise training (Fig. 4G, representative blots shown in Fig. 4I). Intriguingly, the trained Slirp KO mice had a more pronounced increase in all mice after exercise training (Supplementary Fig. 2L), suggesting that improvements in mitochondrial content following exercise training are independent of SLIRP.

These results underline a substantial skeletal muscle mitochondrial plasticity, which is retained despite a 60 -80% reduction in mt-mRNA pools. These /uniFB01 ndings point towards unidenti /uniFB01 ed mechanisms by which exercise training modulates translational ef /uniFB01 -ciency or protein degradation pathways to dictate /uniFB01 nal protein content.

## Exercise training increases mitoribosome mass and mt proteins

We next sought to determine the potential mechanism by which sustained reductions of mitochondrial transcript levels can be bypassed by exercise training. Enhanced mitochondrial protein synthesis mediates exercise training adaptations in muscle mitochondrial function in both young and elderly individuals 42 . Thus, we assessed pathways associated with protein synthesis in mitochondria, facilitated by the resident mitoribomes. We observed training-induced increases in 12S ribosomal RNA (12S rRNA), 16S ribosomal rRNA (16S rRNA, Fig. 5B) and several mitoribosomal proteins, essential components of mitoribosome translation 63,64 (MRPL11, MRPL12, MRPS18B, MRPS35, Fig. 5C). MRPL11, MRPL12, MRPS18B protein content was 86%, 59%, and 48%, respectively, more elevated in response to exercise training in Slirp KO than WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 4H -J). Exercise training increased cytosolic ribosomal protein S6 protein content 68% in WT mice and 34% in Slirp KO mice (rpS6, Fig. 5C; representative blots in Fig. 4L).

Given the predominant impact of Slirp KO on mitochondria, training-induced adaptive changes might also manifest directly within the affected cellular compartment. Here, we investigated mitochondrial quality control systems involving the mitochondrial Lon protease 1 (LONP1), YME1-like ATPase (YME1L1), the p-eIF2 α -ATF4 -CHOPaxis 65 , and PRDX3.

LONP1 and YME1L1 are the frontline defense against mitochondrial damage and remove accumulated unfolded or damaged proteins 66 . Exercise training increased both LONP1 and YME1L1 protein content (Fig. 5E, F), with a 1.7-fold greater response in Slirp KO mice (Supplementary Fig. 4K), suggesting an enhanced mitochondrial quality control induced by exercise training that is augmented in Slirp KO muscles with low mt-mRNA levels.

Recent research identi /uniFB01 es mitochondrial damage as a key activator of the p-eIF2 α -ATF4 -CHOP axis, known as integrated stress response (ISR) 65,66 . Since ISR is involved in mitochondrial quality control, we measured EIF2 α phosphorylation at S51 to investigate the impact of SLIRP loss and exercise training on ISR. The loss of SLIRP tended to increase p-EIF2 α 1.4-fold, indicating the potential presence of mitochondrial damage. Intriguingly, exercise training markedly reduced phospho-EIF2 α by 58% selectively in Slirp KOmice, and below the level of WT SED and WT ET mice. As exercise training had no such effect in the WT mice (Fig. 5G, Supplementary Fig. 4L), exercise training may reduce phospho-EIF2 α speci /uniFB01 cally in the context of mitochondrial damage induced by SLIRP loss to promote protein translation.

Another mitochondrial quality control system involves a mitochondrial scavenger enzyme, peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3). PRDX3 plays a role in balancing redox environment speci /uniFB01 cally in mitochondria 67,68 , possibly contributing to the preservation of factors critical for translation during conditions of mitochondrial dysfunction and exercise training. Interestingly, PRDX3 protein content was 50% lower in Slirp KOSEDcomparedtoWTSEDmice,indicativeofalowermitochondrial

DNA-encoded oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) proteins analysed. Graphical illustration created in BioRender. Pham, T. (2022) BioRender.com/n94e933. E RTqPCR analysis of mitochondrial transcript levels in gastrocnemius of male SED and ET Slirp KO and WT mice (WT SED/ET, n =6/7; Slirp KO SED/ET, n =7/6). SED data also depicted in Fig. 1J. F -H Western blot analysis of ( F ) mtDNA-encoded proteins, MT-ND3 (CI), MT-CO1 (CIV), MT-ATP6 (ATPase), ( G ) nDNA-encoded proteins NDUFB8 (CI), SDHB (CII), UQCRC2 (CIII) and ATP5A (ATPase), ( H ) MTCO1/ATP5A ratio as readout of mitonuclear balance, and ( I ) representative blots in gastrocnemius of male SED and ET Slirp KO and WT mice (WT SED/ET, n =6/8; Slirp KO SED, n =7/6). Data are means ± SEM, including individual values. Geno, main effect of genotype; ET, main effect of exercise training; Geno x ET, interaction between genotype and exercise training; Substrate, main effect of substrate. * p &lt;0.05, ** p &lt;0.01, *** p &lt;0.01asperTwo-wayANOVAwith Š ídák ' s multiple comparisons test ( A , B , C , E , F -H ). Source data are provided as a Source Data /uniFB01 le.

oxidative stress defense capacity in Slirp KOmuscle. This was restored by exercise training, bringing PRDX3 up to levels observed in trained WTmice (Fig. 5I). We further noted that ET lowered the PRDX3 dimer to monomer ratio in both genotypes, indicative of a lower basal mitochondrial-derived peroxide accumulation likely due to an enhancement of scavenger activity (Fig. 5J). The cytosolic peroxidoxin 2 (PRDX2) was unaffected by genotype and exercise training (Fig. 5K, representative blots in Fig. 5L).

Collectively, our /uniFB01 ndings indicate a complex interplay of spatially distinct molecular muscle adaptations in response to Slirp KO and ET. Our /uniFB01 ndings suggest that exercise training induces mechanisms to increase mitochondrial protein synthesis capacity and improve mitochondrial quality control. Speci /uniFB01 cally, exercise training elevated mitoribosome mass and restored mitochondrial quality control to powerfully circumvent the Slirp KO-induced depletion of mtDNAencoded transcript levels.

## Exercise elevates SLIRP and LRPPRC in human skeletal muscle

Our intriguing results from mouse and /uniFB02 y models prompted us to test whether our results provide translational value for humans in health and disease. SLIRP and LRPPRC protein content were determined in human skeletal muscle in four independent exercise cohorts employing different exercise modalities in conjunction with or without aging or diabetes and in males and females. Participant characteristics and study designs for the different ET modalities have been published previously for all the clinical studies 69 -72 .

Skeletal muscle SLIRP and LRPPRC protein abundances were 70% increased following 14-weeks of controlled and supervised aerobic and strength exercise training intervention in healthy young women 69 (Fig. 6A). Also, a 6-week high-intensity interval training (HIIT) intervention elevated muscle protein content of SLIRP (+ 80%, Fig. 6B) and LRPPRC (+ 50%, Fig. 6B) in healthy young men 72 . Thus, the exercise training response of SLIRP and LRPPRC was highly consistent, independent of sex, and responsive to various exercise modalities. The 12week progressive resistance exercise training 70 increased SLIRP and LRPPRC muscle protein content in the entire group of young and old individuals but had no signi /uniFB01 cant effect on LRPPRC abundance in neither young nor elderly subjects separately (Fig. 6C). The mtDNAencoded transcript levels of MT-ND6 , MT-CYB , MT-CO1 and MT-ATP6 were comparable across all groups (Fig. 6D), indicating that mitochondrial gene expression was not signi /uniFB01 cantly affected by either aging or the training regimen in this study at the time of sampling. Similarly to our observations in mice, we observed a marked 1.9 and 2.3-fold increase in MRPL11 in elderly and young individuals, respectively (Fig. 6E; representative blot in Fig. 6C), supporting that the increase in mitoribosomal biogenesis and mitochondrial translation capacity in response to exercise training is conserved in humans 42 .

metabolism in individuals with obesity and T2D 73,74 , although this association is not always clear 75 . The training response of muscle SLIRP and LRPPRC to 8-weeks HIIT was conserved in individuals who were lean (+ 150% and +54%) or obese (+ 85% and +45%, Fig. 6F). However, the exercise response for LRPPRC, but not SLIRP, was blunted in muscle of patients with T2D in comparison to lean individuals (Fig. 6F), suggesting impaired sensitivity of muscle to some mitochondrial adaptations to ET in T2D. At the mRNA level, mt-DNA encoded

men and women, lean and obese. However, the exercise training response of LRPPRC was blunted in patients with T2D. This suggests that T2D is associated with decreased sensitivity to some of the adaptive mitochondrial responses normally elicited by exercise training, possibly in /uniFB02 uenced by exercise intensity or volume. Thus, our clinical data in humans provide strong translational value of the SLIRPde /uniFB01 cient /uniFB02 y and mouse models and point towards a conserved requirement of SLIRP for skeletal muscle health, and potentially the SLIRP-independent mechanisms that compensate during exercise training.

## Discussion

Our investigation led to six key /uniFB01 ndings that bridge substantial knowledge gaps concerning the role of mitochondrial posttranscriptional mechanisms on skeletal muscle biology and their contributions to exercise training adaptations.

First, lack of Slirp led to mild mitochondrial network disruption, mitochondrial fragmentation, and reduced respiratory capacity in skeletal muscle in mice. Second, SLIRP de /uniFB01 ciency impaired muscle functionality, and reduced lifespan in /uniFB02 ies. Third, SLIRP was identi /uniFB01 ed as an exercise training-responsive downstream target of PGC1α . Fourth, SLIRP was needed for improving blood glucose regulation after exercise training in male mice. Fifth, exercise training restored the mitochondrial defects elicited by the lack of SLIRP on mitochondrial structure, respiration, and mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS, via mechanisms likely involving the upregulation of mitoribosome content and enhanced mitochondrial quality control. Finally, we established a translational foundation for our /uniFB01 ndings by substantiating the conservation of SLIRP´s response to exercise training in four independent human cohorts integrating different exercise modalities, sex, health, and age conditions. These /uniFB01 ndings not only unravel a delicate interplay between the mt-mRNA-stabilizing protein SLIRP, and the integrity of skeletal muscle mitochondria structure and performance, but also underscore the potential of exercise training in promoting selective mitochondrial translation capacity and quality control to circumvent these mechanisms (graphical summary depicted in Fig. 7).

Our /uniFB01 rst /uniFB01 nding indicates that SLIRP is a hitherto unrecognized player in regulating mitochondria content, structure, and respiration in skeletal muscle. Our results are partially consistent with reports in heart, liver, and kidney Slirp KO 17,18,58 showing that SLIRP forms a complex with LRPPRC and is crucial for the maintenance of the mtmRNA reservoir. Accordingly, our observation of mitochondria with abnormal cristae in Slirp KO muscle aligns with TEM micrographs of Lrpprc KO heart tissue 19 . However, despite the stark similarities, mitochondrial respiration was mildly compromised in Slirp KOskeletal muscle, but not in heart or liver 18 , underscoring SLIRP ' s functional importance within skeletal muscle relative to other tissues. In alignment, previous research further showed that Slirp KO skeletal muscle /uniFB01 bers have reduced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ storage capacity 77 . Interestingly, the young full-body Slirp KO mice only have a mild molecular phenotype and appear overall healthy, despite the signi /uniFB01 cant decrease in mt-mRNA levels, respiration, and mitochondrial morphology. The effects of Slirp KO on mitochondrial morphology further seemed to be isolated to IMF mitochondria, whereas subsarcolemmal mitochondria were unaffected at this age. Yet, detrimental physiological long-term consequences are suggested by the /uniFB02 ies lacking SLIRP1 given their much shorter life span. Thus, our present /uniFB01 ndings underscore the importance of SLIRP across various tissue types, with emphasis on its importance for normal skeletal muscle mitochondrial morphology and respiration, and overall mitochondrial health.

Our second /uniFB01 nding that SLIRP depletion compromised climbing ability, impaired starvation tolerance, and reduced lifespan in /uniFB02 ies, illustrates the detrimental functional consequences of lacking SLIRP long-term in the muscle tissue. SLIRP1 has been demonstrated to interact with the /uniFB02 y orthologue protein LRPPRC1 to regulate mitochondrial mRNA polyadenylation and maturation, while SLIRP2 interacts with LRPPRC2 to coordinate mitochondrial translation 19,27,28 . It has been shown that SLIRP1/LRPPRC1 and SLIRP2/LRPPRC2 complexes in /uniFB02 ies have distinct essential roles in the regulation of mtDNA expression. This distinction likely accounts for the varying impacts on climbing ability, starvation tolerance, and lifespan observed when SLIRP1 or SLIRP2 is lost. The effects of mitochondrial proteins on modulating life span are equivocal. Some report that the depletion of speci /uniFB01 c OXPHOS genes reduces life span, whereas others report no effect or an increase on life span in model organisms 78 -80 . The ' Mitochondrial Threshold Effect Theory ' 81 posits that mild mitochondrial dysfunction allows normal physiology in model organisms until a threshold is reached. Beyond that, severe mitochondrial dysfunction can lead to premature aging, developmental arrest or even death 82 -84 . In support, introducing a heteroplasmic pathogenic mtDNA mutation in the tRNA Ala gene into Slirp KO mice caused an aggravated mitochondrial translation defect, resulting in embryonic lethality and impaired growth of mouse embryonic /uniFB01 broblasts 85 . Our /uniFB01 ndings support an important role for SLIRP and mitochondrial function in maintaining normal lifespan because we observed reduced survival in muscle-speci /uniFB01 c SLIRP KD /uniFB02 ies.

Our third /uniFB01 nding was that PGC-1 α 1 modulated SLIRP protein, providing evidence for a new training-responsive PGC-1 α target in skeletal muscle. Interestingly, training-induced adaptations in mitochondrial proteins can occur independently of PGC-1a1 as the main regulator 86 . In agreement with that, our /uniFB01 fth /uniFB01 nding was that the training-induced improvements in mitochondrial function could bypass SLIRP deletion. These /uniFB01 ndings agree with other studies showing that exercise training can rescue mitochondrial dysfunction and elicit improvements in glucose homeostasis in mice and humans 13,53,86,87 . Interestingly, SLIRP was required for the traininginduced improvements in blood glucose regulation in trained male Slirp KO mice. The mechanism by which SLIRP in /uniFB02 uences glucose metabolism was not established in the present study, although this could be due to decreased intramyocellular insulin signalling 88 , reduced insulin-independent glucose uptake 14 , capillarization, and/or blood /uniFB02 ow 89 . Female mice did not improve their glucose tolerance in response to exercise training. Sexual dimorphism in response to metabolic challenges, including exercise training, has been frequently reported in mouse models 90,91 . In both sexes, exercise training circumvented SLIRP to induce mitochondrial and metabolic adaptations in skeletal muscle, despite sustained low mitochondrial transcript levels. However, we observed differences in mechanisms by which male and female mice compensated for the lack of SLIRP, illuminating an exciting area for further investigation.

Wewereintrigued by the observation that exercise training could circumvent even 60 -80% loss in mitochondrial-mRNA pools to upregulate mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS proteins. In other words, the bene/uniFB01 cial effect of exercise training on mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and ATP provision is independent of a correction of mt-mRNA transcript levels and LRPPRC/SLIRP protein content. As mtDNA copy number was either increased in SED Slirp KO or unchanged in ET Slirp KO mice, these /uniFB01 ndings give rise to the possibility that mt-mRNAs are produced in excess in vivo 18 . Excess mt-mRNA mayallow for rapid engagement of mitochondrial protein synthesis in the event of sudden changes in energy demand. In response to exercise training, the mitoribosomal components, MRPL11, MRPL12, MRPS18B, 12S rRNA , and 16S rRNA were upregulated, indicating increased mitoribosome biogenesis and capacity for mitochondrial protein synthesis. These adaptations to exercise training may help sustain protein synthesis and normal physiology, even in the presence of low mt-mRNA abundance. The greater increase in OXPHOS, mtrRNA, and mitoribosomal proteins in Slirp KO ET mice indicates that exercise training may be more effective in the presence of mitochondrial dysfunction, providing exciting avenues for exploring the use of exercise training in conditions of mitochondrial dysfunction. Exercise training also upregulated LONP1 and YME1L1, both important regulators of mitochondrial quality control and proteostasis, and PRDX3, linked to peroxide scavenging. While mitoribosomal protein content, 12S rRNA , 16S rRNA , LONP1, YME1L1, and PRDX3 may not directly control translation ef /uniFB01 ciency, their roles in the mitoribosomal makeup and improved mitochondrial quality control can in /uniFB02 uence the overall cellular environment where protein synthesis occurs. Albeit limited by not directly measuring mitochondrial translational rate, this working hypothesis is supported by /uniFB01 ndings in human skeletal muscle showing that mitochondrial protein synthesis and upregulation of mitoribosome biogenesis is at the core of exercise training-induced bene /uniFB01 ts 42 . That mitochondrial stress was effectively relieved via exercise training is suggested by the marked reduction in phosphorylation of EIF2a at S51, an integral marker of the ISR selectively in Slirp KO mice. This suggests a unique interaction between mitochondrial damage and the ISR, highlighting the heightened sensitivity of Slirp KOmicetoexercise training.

Finally, our results are prospectively relevant to humans, as SLIRP and LRPPRC were consistently upregulated in human skeletal muscle in response to multiple exercise training modalities in both sexes. The effect of HIITwas blunted for LRPPRC in patients with T2D. Interestingly, the age-related decline in muscle mitochondrial protein synthesis 92 can be reversed by exercise training in elderly 42 , corroborating our /uniFB01 ndings that ET bypasses SLIRP to increase mitoribosomal translation. Importantly, our /uniFB01 ndings demonstrate that the synthesis of mtDNA-encoded OXPHOS proteins is not limited by transcript abundance in skeletal muscle -a feature that seems to be conserved as a fundamental mechanism 27,42 .

Taken together, our /uniFB01 ndings not only imply that mt-mRNA stabilization via SLIRP/LRPPRC is needed for the regulation of basal mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle, but also highlight an incredible exercise training -stimulated plasticity of mitochondria in skeletal muscle facing mitochondrial defects (graphical summary depicted in Fig. 7). Our /uniFB01 ndings underscore exercise training as a therapeutic intervention to combat mitochondrial dysfunction in genetic and lifestyle-induced muscle pathologies, including T2D.

In this work, we uncover a conserved role for mitochondrial transcript stability via SLIRP in mitochondrial structure and respiratory capacity in skeletal muscle. We identify SLIRP as an exercise-responsive downstream target of PGC-1 α that is conserved in human skeletal muscle and critical for lifespan in Drosophila. Because the defects in Slirp KO muscle could be reversed by ET, these /uniFB01 ndings add to the clinical relevance and add impetus to the important health-promoting role of ET in pathologies characterized by mitochondrial defects.

## Methods

## All research complies with all relevant ethical regulations

Clinical experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee of Copenhagen (H-17004045, H-2-2010-100, H-1-2013-034) or by the Regional Scienti /uniFB01 c Ethical Committees for Southern Denmark (S20170142) and performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration II and with informed consent was obtained from all human research participants. No compensation was given to the study participants, apart from NCT02429128 and NCT03317704 where subjects received a small compensation for discomforts related to the study and were reimbursed for travel expenses. Studies including human study participants are described in refs. 69 -72 and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03500016, NCT02429128, NCT01252381, and NCT03317704). All mouse experiments complied with the European Convention for the protection of vertebrate animals used for experimental and other scienti /uniFB01 c purposes (No. 123, Strasbourg, France, 1985; EU Directive 2010/63/EU for animal experiments) and were approved by the Danish Animal Experimental Inspectorate (License number: 2016-15-020101043, 2021-15-0201-01104).

## Fly maintenance

In standard conditions, the /uniFB02 ies were maintained on a SYA medium containing 0.5% (w/v) agar, 2.4% (v/v) nipagin, 0.7% (v/v) proprionic acid, 10% (w/v) dry baker ' s yeast and 5% (w/v) sucrose. The experiments took place at +25 °C, 65% humidity under a 12 h:12 h light:dark cycle. RNAi lines for SLIRP1 (51019 GD), SLIRP2 (23675 GD), and the GD library control line (w1118, 60000 GD) were obtained from Vienna Drosophila Resource Center. Mef2-GAL4 line was obtained from Bloomington Stock Center to generate muscle-speci /uniFB01 c SLIRP KD /uniFB02 ies.

## Negative geotaxis (climbing) assay

Drosophila has a natural tendency to climb upwards, also known as negative geotaxis. The negative geotaxis, or climbing, assay was performedaspreviously described 93 . Brie /uniFB02 y, 20 male Drosophila /uniFB02 ies aged 5 -6 days were transferred into empty vials (25 × 95 mm), and another empty vial was taped on top to create a 25 × 190 mm cylinder. Six cylinders were set side by side into an apparatus. The apparatus was tapped down 5 times to make all the /uniFB02 ies fall to the bottom of the cylinder. The climbing assay was measured in technical triplicate for each biological replicate, with 90 s allowed for each climb. The assay wasrecordedwithacameraandvideoswereanalysedtodeterminethe timefor half of the /uniFB02 ies in the vial to reach halfway point (95 mm) in the cylinder.

## Starvation assay using the Drosophila Activity Monitoring System (DAMS)

Four-day old male /uniFB02 ies were individually housed in monitor tubes with an outside diameter of 5 mm (PPT5x65, Trikinetics, Waltham, MA). For starvation analysis, the tubes contained 1% agar in water. Thirtytwo tubes per monitor (DAM2 Drosophila Activity Monitor, Trikinetics, Waltham, MA) were set up, one monitor per genotype. For the starvation analysis, /uniFB02 ies were kept in the DAM system until the last /uniFB02 y had died.

## Lifespan assay

For lifespan assays, /uniFB02 ies were mated at a controlled density of 25 female and 10 male /uniFB02 ies, respectively. One-day old male /uniFB02 ies were collected into vials (10 male /uniFB02 ies per vial, with 10 vials per genotype). The /uniFB02 ies were kept on a SYA diet in Droso /uniFB02 ippers (http://www. droso /uniFB02 ipper.com/). Flies were /uniFB02 ipped onto fresh food every second day and deaths were scored during the transfer.

## Mice

PGC-1 α 1 transgenic mouse (PGC-1 α 1 OE) . The generation of the model, quality, and speci /uniFB01 city of the overexpression has been described previously 38 , of which we analyzed quadriceps muscle samples of 12-week-old male WT and PGC-1 α 1 transgenic mice, kept on C57/Bl6 background.

PGC-1 α 4 transgenic mouse (PGC-1 α 4 OE) . The generation of the model, quality, and speci /uniFB01 city of the overexpression has been described previously 36 , of which we analyzed gastrocnemius muscle samples of 12-week-old male WT and PGC-1 α 4transgenic mice, kept on C57/Bl6 background.

Skeletal muscle-speci /uniFB01 c PGC-1 α knockout (PGC-1 α mKO) . The generation of the model, quality, and speci /uniFB01 city of the KO has been described previously 49 . Male muscle-speci /uniFB01 c PGC-1 α MKO mice and littermate control mice homozygous for loxP inserts (lox/lox) were generated by crossbreeding myogenin-Cre mice with loxP /uniFB02 anked-Pgc1 α mice. Mice were housed in a 12:12 h light/dark photocycle at 22 ± 2 °C with nesting material.

For the acute exercise bout, tibialis anterior muscles of PGC-1 α MKO mice and littermate control mice were collected 3 h after one bout of equal distance treadmill running (1.4 km) at 10° incline and 60% of their individual maximal running speed achieved by a graded treadmill running test 94 .

For the ET intervention, mice were single-housed with or without access to in-cage running wheels from 8 to 20 weeks old. Running distance and duration were monitored by a regular cycle computer. PGC-1 α MKOmicetendedtorunless thanlox/lox, thus running wheels of lox/lox mice were occasionally blocked to ensure equal running distance. On average, mice ran 25 km/week. The running wheels were blocked for all mice 24 h prior to euthanization and quadriceps muscle was harvested in the morning in the fed state.

AAV6 Vector construction and preparation . The AAV6 vector for SLIRP overexpression and ultra-puri /uniFB01 ed eGFP control AAV6 virus were manufactured by VectorBuilder Inc. (Shenandoah, Texas, USA; AAV6SP(VB190219-1010jvy)-C).

Transfection of tibialis anterior muscle using rAAV6 vector . Viral particles were diluted in Gelofusine (B. Braun, Germany) to a dosage of 5 × 10 9 vector genomes at a volume of 30 uL per injection. For muscle -speci /uniFB01 c delivery of rAAV6 vectors, 12 -week-old wildtype mice ( n = 6) were placed under general anaesthesia (2% iso /uniFB02 uorane in O2). and injected intramuscularly with rAAV6:SLIRP in the TA muscle of one leg and control rAAV6:eGFP (empty vector) in the contralateral leg. Muscles were harvested 4 weeks after rAAV6 administration.

Time course of acute exercise . All mice were maintained under a 12:12 h light/dark photocycle at 22 ± 2 °C with nesting material. The female mice were group-housed. All mice received a rodent chow diet (Altromin no. 1324; Chr. Pedersen, Denmark) and water ad libitum .

Twelve-week old female C57BL/6 J mice ( n =8foreachtimepoint) were subjected to an acute exercise bout (1 h running, 60% of maximal running intensity, 15° incline). Quadriceps muscle was harvested from rested and exercised mice immediately after, 2 h, 6 h, and 24 h after the acute exercise bout.

SLIRP knockout mouse ( Slirp KOmice) . The generation of the model, quality, and speci /uniFB01 city of the KO has been described previously 18 . Sperm of homozygous Slirp KO mice kindly provided by Nils-Göran Larsson and re-derived offspring was backcrossed to C57BL/6 N background in our own animal facilities.

All mice were maintained under a 12:12 h light/dark photocycle at 22 ± 2 °C with nesting material. The female mice were group-housed (except during the ET intervention), whereas the male mice were single-housed. All mice received a rodent chow diet (Altromin no. 1324; Chr. Pedersen, Denmark) and water ad libitum .

Mouse genotyping of Slirp KO and WT mice was performed as previously described 95 using qPCR on DNA from ear punches with the following primers: WT; 5 ' -AGAAGGGAATCCACAGGATAGGACA-3 ' and 5 ' -GCTTTATTCC TAGTGCTGGC CTTGTT-3 ' , KO; 5 ' -AGAAGGGAAT CCACAGGATA GGACA-3 ' and 5 ' -CGCCGTATAA TGTATGCTAT ACGAAGTT-3 ' .

10-week ET intervention in Slirp KO mice . For 10-week voluntary wheel-running exercise training interventions, 16 -18-week-old Slirp KO and littermate mice were randomized into test groups with or without access to in-cage running wheels (Tecniplast activity cage, wheel diameter: 23 cm; Tecniplast, Buguggiate VA, Italy). The experimental design is schematically illustrated in Fig. 3A. Running distance wasmonitoredbyaregularcyclecomputerpriortothemetabolictests for 6 weeks. Running wheels were locked 12 h prior to terminal procedures to avoid effects of acute exercise bouts.

Body composition . Total, fat, and lean body mass was measured by nuclear magnetic resonance using an EchoMRI ™ (USA).

Glucose tolerance test (GTT) and plasma insulin analysis . We subjected the Slirp KO and WT mice to a GTT at 7 weeks of the training intervention study (as illustrated in Fig. 3A). The GTT was executed after a 5 h fasting period (7:00 a.m. -12:00 p.m.). Resting blood samples were taken from the tail 30 min prior to the intraperitoneal injection of D-mono-glucose (2 g/kg body weight). Tail blood glucose was measured after 0, 20, 40, 60, and 90 min of injection.

To measure glucose-stimulated plasma insulin concentration at time-point (min) 0 and 20, tail vein blood samples were collected in a capillary-tube (50 µ l), centrifuged at 14,200 g for 5 min at 4 °C, plasma collected and stored at -80°C. Insulin concentration was determined in duplicates using the Ultra-Sensitive Mouse Insulin ELISA Kit (#80 -INSTRU -E10; ALPCO Diagnostics) to the manufacturer ' s instructions. The incremental area under the curve (iAUC) from the basal blood glucose concentration was determined using the trapezoid rule.

Exercise capacity tests . Slirp KO and WT mice were acclimatized to the treadmill on 3 consecutive days by running at a speed of 0.16 m/s and incline of 10° for 5 min the /uniFB01 rst day and 10 min the following days. Prior to the running test and with a 1 h delay, 2 blood samples were drawn from the tail before the test for pre-exercise blood glucose and blood lactate measurements. Subsequently, the mice ran at 0.16 m/s for 5 min followed by a gradual increase in speed every minute with 0.02 m/s until exhaustion. Once the mouse reached its maximal running capacity, 2 blood samples were immediately drawn from the tail for post-exercise blood glucose and blood lactate measurements. The test was stopped when the mouse failed to keep up with the treadmill despite motivational efforts by the researcher.

In situ contraction . This protocol was described elsewhere 96 . The mice were anaesthetized by inhalation of 2% iso /uniFB02 urane during the entire procedure. Acupuncture needles (0.2 mm, TAI-CHI; B.C. Medical, Nykoebing SJ, Denmark) were inserted into both of the proximal and distal part of the mouse quadriceps femoris muscle of male 45 -49weeks old WT mice. The in situ contraction protocol consisted of nine sets of contraction bouts of 1 min in duration, with a 30 s break between bouts. The contraction bouts consisted of 3 s of 10 V stimulations of pulses with a duration of 0.1 ms at a frequency of 100 Hz, repeated every 10 s. The contralateral leg served as a resting control. Two hours after the contraction, the mice were anaesthetized using 1:10 lidocaine:pentobarbital (6 mg of pentobarbital sodium 100g -1 body weight) by intraperitoneal injection and given a retro-orbital injection of 21.75 mg kg -1 body weight puromycin (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA) in saline. Exactly 15 min after puromycin injection, the mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation and Quad muscles were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.

TMRE staining in live /uniFB01 bers . Flexor digitorum brevis muscles (FDB) were dissected and then incubated for 2 h in serum-free α -MEM(22571020, Gibco) containing 1.9 mg/ml collagenase type 1 from clostridium histolyticum (C0130, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin(9048-46-8, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C on a rotator. After collagenase treatment, muscles were incubated in α -MEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (26050-70, Gibco) and subjected to mechanical dissociation using /uniFB01 re-polished Pasteur pipettes. Single muscle /uniFB01 bers were seeded in 35x14mm glass-bottom microwell dishes (P35G-1.5-14C, MatTek Corporation) coated with 4 uL of Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm murine sarcoma ECM gel (E1270, Merck). Muscle /uniFB01 bers were kept in α -MEM containing 5% fetal bovine serum in a cell incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) for at least 16 h prior to the experiments.

For determination of mitochondrial membrane potential ( ΔΨ mitochondrial)and mitochondrial network morphology, the /uniFB01 bers were incubated in 20nM tetramethylrhodamine and ethyl ester (TMRE+, Life Technologies) dissolved in Krebs Ringer buffer (145 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) for 30 min before imaging. Confocal images were collected using a C-Apochromat ×40, 1.2 NA water immersion objective lens on an LSM 980 confocal microscope (Zeiss) driven Zeiss Zen Blue 3.

Mitochondrial network analysis was performed semiautomatically in ImageJ (National Institute of Health, USA). At least two nucleus-free regions per /uniFB01 ber were analyzed blindly. Before segmentation, the background was subtracted, and the pixels were averaged using a value of mean=2. The images were segmented, and particle analyses revealed the relative area of the TMRE+ signal compared to the total area (% mitochondrial area). The fragmentation index was calculated as the number of objects in relation to the total area covered by the dye. The ImageJ ' RedHot ' lookuptable wasused to visualize the images.

Transmission electron microscopy analysis . A small longitudinal section (&lt;2 mm) of the red portion of the gastrocnemius muscle tissue was /uniFB01 xed by immersion 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.05 M Phosphatebuffer, pH7.4 and stored at 4 °C. The samples were rinsed four times in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4, and post/uniFB01 xed with 1% osmium tetroxide (OsO4) and 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide [K4Fe(CN)6] in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4 for 90 min at 4 °C. The samples were then rinsed twice and dehydrated through a graded mixture of alcohol at 4 -20°C, in /uniFB01 ltrated with graded mixtures of propylene oxide and Epon at 20 °C, and embedded in 100% Epon at 30 °C, as previously described (Nielsen et al., 2011). Longitudinally oriented sections, 60nm thick, were obtained with a Leica UC7 ultramicrotome. The sections were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and subsequently examined and image recorded in a CM100 TEM (Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) operated at 100 kV, and equipped with a Veleta camera and the iTem software package (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) at a resolution of 2048 × 2048 pixels.

A mean of eight /uniFB01 bers per sample (7 -9) was included from the sectioned samples, and from each /uniFB01 ber, 24 images were obtained at x13,500 magni /uniFB01 cation. The imaging was performed in a randomized systematic order including 12 images from the subsarcolemmal (SS) region, and 6 from both the super /uniFB01 cial and central region of the intermyo /uniFB01 brillar (IMF) space. The Z-disc width was measured once on all IMF images and the mean from all /uniFB01 bers within one sample was calculated to determine the /uniFB01 ber type. The categorization of /uniFB01 ber types was based on previous reports from observations 48 . The images were analyzed by two genotype-blinded investigators and all further analyses were performed by the same blinded investigator. The quanti /uniFB01 cation of mitochondrial morphology was done using the Radius EM Imaging Software (Emsis GmbH, Radius 2.0).

Several measurements were included in this study: 1) Mitochondrial number: Total number of mitochondrial pro /uniFB01 les (count). 2) Mitochondrial volume fraction: IMF mitochondrial volume is annotated as percentage of mitochondria covering the IMF space. 3) Damaged mitochondria: Mitochondria were categorized as damaged when they were swollen, vacuolated, or empty.

Mitochondrial respiration in gastrocnemius muscle . In a subset of mice, mitochondrial respiratory capacity was measured in permeabilized gastrocnemius skeletal muscle /uniFB01 bers as previously described 97 . In brief, gastrocnemius muscle was rinsed from fat and connective tissue and separated into small /uniFB01 ber bundles. Fiber bundles were permeabilized with saponin (50 μ g/ml) in BIOPS buffer for 30 min, followed by a 20 min wash in MiR05 buffer on ice. Mitochondrial respiration was measured in duplicate under hyperoxic conditions at 37 °C using high resolution respirometry (Oxygraph-2k, Oroboros Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria). The following protocol was applied: Leak respiration was assessed by addition of malate (5 mM) and pyruvate (5 mM), followed by adding three different concentrations of ADP (0.01 mM,0.25 mMand5 mM;forthe /uniFB01 nal concentrationofADP, 3 mM of magnesium (Mg) was added as well) to measure complex I linked respiratory capacity. 10 mM Glutamate was added to measure complex I linked respiratory capacity followed by 10 mM succinate to measure complex I + II linked respiratory capacity. Finally, 5 μ M Antimycin A wasaddedtoinhibit complex III in the electron transport chain. Pooled data for both sexes are shown as no sex-speci /uniFB01 c differences were detected.

Contraction-stimulated fatty acid oxidation in isolated soleus muscles . Contraction-stimulated exogenous palmitate oxidation in isolated soleus muscle from Slirp KO and WT mice was measured as previously described 98 . In brief, excised soleus muscles from mice anesthetized with pentobarbital were mounted at resting tension ( ∼ 5 mN) in 15 ml vertical incubation chambers with a force transducer (Radnoti, Monrovia, CA) containing 30 °C carbonated (95% O2 and 5% CO2) Krebs-Henseleit Ringer buffer (KRB), pH = 7.4, supplemented with 5 mM glucose, 2% fatty acid-free BSA, and 0.5 mM palmitate. After ∼ 20min of pre-incubation, the incubation buffer was refreshed with KRB additionally containing [1 -14 C]-palmitate (0.0044 MBq/ml; Amersham BioSciences, Buckinghamshire, U.K.). To seal the incubation chambers, mineral oil (Cat. No. M5904, Sigma -Aldrich) was added on top. Exogenous palmitate oxidation was measured simultaneously at rest and during 25 min contractions (18 trains/min, 0.6 s pulses, 30Hz, 60V). After incubation, incubation buffer and muscles were collected to determine the rate of palmitate oxidation as previously described 97,99,100 . Palmitate oxidation was determined as CO2 production (complete FA oxidation) and acid-soluble metabolites (representing incomplete FA oxidation). As no difference was observed in complete and incomplete FA oxidation between genotypes, palmitate oxidation is presented as a sum of these two forms.

Subcellular fractionations . The subcellular fractionation assay for frozen muscle was adapted 44,45 and performed on ice or at 4 °C, where applicable. The frozen and pulverized muscle samples were homogenized for 2 min at 17.5 Hz using a TissueLyser II bead mill (QIAGEN,

USA) in cold isolation buffer solution, herein referred to as ISO buffer, containing 880 mM sucrose, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 50mM NaCl, 5 mMMgCl2,5mMEGTA,proteaseinhibitorandphosphataseinhibitor (cOmplete ™ Protease Inhibitor and PhosStop ™ , Roche, Germany). The homogenate was then rotated end-over-end for 30min and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min. The pellet was washed and centrifuged twice at 1000 g for 10 min in ISO buffer. The resulting pellet was used to prepare the nuclear fraction (not shown), while the supernatant was used to prepare the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions.

For the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions, the /uniFB01 rst supernatant fraction was centrifuged twice for 10 min at 1000g. The resulting pellets were discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged for 20 min at 20,000 g . From here the resulting supernatant and pellet were used to obtain the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions, respectively.

For the cytosolic fraction, the supernatant was centrifuged twice for 20 min at 20,000 g and the resulting pellets were discarded. The /uniFB01 nal supernatant contained the cytosolic fraction.

For the mitochondrial fraction, the pellet was resuspended in 200 ul ISO buffer, centrifuged twice for 20min at 20 000g and the resulting supernatants were discarded. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 75 μ L mitochondrial lysis buffer [50 mM Tris HCl (pH 6.8), 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, and protease and phosphatase inhibitor] and rotated end-over-end for 20 min. The /uniFB01 nal suspension contained the mitochondrial fraction.

The total protein content of each subcellular fraction was determined colorimetrically, using the bicinchoninic acid method and bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a protein standard (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scienti /uniFB01 c, Rockford, IL, USA). For subsequent immunoblotting, the same amount of protein was loaded onto each lane.

Lysate preparation and immunoblotting . Lysate preparation and immunoblotting of vastus lateralis muscles samples of HIIT in young, healthy men wereperformed asdescribed by Hostrup et al. 101 , whereas lysate preparation and immunoblotting of vastus lateralis muscles of HIIT in individuals, who were lean, obese or T2D were performed as described by Kruse et al. 102 .

To preserve and assess PRDX3 dimer to monomer ratio, freshly harvested mouse gastrocnemius muscle tissue was incubated for 10 min in ice-cold 100 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) diluted in PBS. NEMwassubsequentlyaspiratedand the tissue homogenized for 1 min at 30 Hz using a TissueLyser II bead mill (QIAGEN, USA) in ice-cold homogenization buffer [10% glycerol, 1% NP-40, 20 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 150mM NaCl, 50mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 20 mM β -glycerophosphate, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl /uniFB02 uoride, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), 1 mM EGTA (pH 8.0), 2 mM Na3VO4, leupeptin (10 μ gml -1 ), aprotinin (10 μ gml -1 ), and 3 mM benzamidine].

Lysate preparation and immunoblotting of all remaining mouse tissues and human vastus lateralis muscle samples of aerobic and strength ET in women 69 , and resistance training in the young and elderly cohorts 103 were performed as previously described 25 . Immunoblotting of the NEM-treated samples was performed under nondenaturing conditions. The primary antibodies used are listed in Supplementary Table 1.

Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining was used as a control to assess total protein loading and transfer ef /uniFB01 ciency 104 byquantifying the whole lane and for each sample set, a representative membrane from the immunoblotting is shown. The same Coomassie brilliant blue staining is presented for proteins analyzed when derived from the same sample set. Band densitometry was carried out using Image Lab (version 6.0.1). For each set of samples, a standard curve was loaded to ensure quanti /uniFB01 cation within the linear range for each protein probed for. Uncropped and unprocessed scans of all blots are included in the Source Data /uniFB01 le.

RNAextraction and RT -qPCR . Figures 1J, 4F: RNA was extracted from ~20 mg of pulverized whole mouse gastrocnemius muscle using TRIzol ™ reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer ' s instructions (tissue homogenization was performed using the MP Bio lysis system) and treated with the TURBO DNA -free ™ Kit (Ambion) to remove contaminating DNA. For RT -qPCRexpression analysis, cDNA was reversed transcribed from 0.85 μ g total RNA using the High -Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems) in the presence of RNase Block (Agilent). The qPCR was performed in a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real -Time PCR System (Life Technologies), using TaqMan ™ Universal Master Mix II, with UNG (Applied Biosystems) to quantify mitochondrial transcripts (mitochondrial -rRNAs and mt -mRNAs). The gene expression levels were determined using the ΔΔ Ct method, comparing the Ct values of mitochondrial transcripts to that of the beta-actin reference gene for normalization.

Figure 2A, C -E: Total RNA was extracted from pulverized quadriceps muscle using an adapted guanidinium thiocyanate-phenolchloroform extraction method. Reverse transcription to cDNA was performed as previously described 51 . Real -time qPCR was performed in triplicate for 2 A, C, D and duplicate for 2E with QuantStudio 7 Flex Real -Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). Cycle threshold (Ct) was converted to a relative amount using a standard curve derived from a serial dilution of a representative pooled samples run together with the samples of interest. Beta-actin or Hprt mRNA was used for normalization of target mRNA levels.

Figure 6D: Total RNA extraction from vastus lateralis muscle and reverse transcription to cDNA was performed as previously described 70 . The qPCR was performed in a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real -Time PCR System (Life Technologies), using TaqMan ™ Universal Master Mix II (Applied Biosystems) to quantify mt-mRNAs. The gene expression levels were determined using the ΔΔ Ct method, comparing the Ct values of mitochondrial transcripts to that of the 18S rRNA reference gene for normalization.

Figure 6G: Total RNA was extracted from skeletal muscle biopsies using TRI Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) following the manufacturer ' s instructions. cDNA was reversed transcribed using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems), while the qPCR was performed on an Aria Mx (Agilent) using a TaqMan ™ Universal Master Mix II (Applied Biosystems). The gene expression levels were determined using the ΔΔ Ct method with the mRNA levels being normalized to the geometric mean of PPIA and B2M .

Primers or Taqman probes or Taqman expression assays used for mRNAlevels measured in Figs. 2, 4 and 6 are shown in Supplementary Table 2.

DNA isolation and mtDNA quanti /uniFB01 cation . Total DNA was extracted from ~20 mg mouse gastrocnemius muscle using the Dneasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer ' s instructions and treated with RNase A. Levels of mtDNA were measured by qPCR using 2.5 ng of DNA in a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real -Time PCR System using TaqMan ™ Universal Master Mix II, with UNG. The mt-Nd1 and mtNd6/Nd5 TaqMan gene expression assays were used. 18S rRNA was used for normalization.

Aerobic and strength ET intervention in healthy young women . A detailed description of the study participants, research design and methods has been previously published 69,70 . In the present study, we included vastus lateralis muscle lysate for immunoblotting obtained from 9 healthy young women (age, 33± 6 years; body mass index (BMI), 23.2 ± 2.6 kg m -2 ) before and after 14-week of aerobic and strength exercise training.

High-intensity interval training intervention in healthy young men . A detailed description of the study participants, research design and methods has been previously published 72 . In the present study, we included vastus lateralis muscle lysate for immunoblotting obtained from 6 healthy young men before and after 6-week HIIT training.

Progressive resistance exercise training in male young and older individuals . A detailed description of the study participants, research design and methods has been previously published 70 . The original study reported no additive effect of vitamin D intake during the 12 weeks of resistance exercise training on muscle hypertrophy or muscle strength 69,70 . Accordingly, in the present study, samples from young or older participants were considered as one group, irrespective of vitamin D intake. We included vastus lateralis muscle samples (~10 mg wet weight) for immunoblotting obtained from a subset of the original sample set due to lack of sample material. For the young participants, we included 10 samples before and 6 samples after resistance exercise training. For the older participants we included 11 before and 9 samples after resistance exercise training.

High-intensity interval training in middle-aged male individuals, who were lean, obese or obese with type 2 diabetes . A detailed description of the study participants, eligibility criteria, research design and methods has been previously published 71 . In brief, 15 middle-aged men with T2D and obesity, 15 age- and BMI-matched glucose-tolerant men with obesity, and 18 age-matched glucose-tolerant lean men were recruited. All participants, except four (two men with T2D and obesity and two lean men), completed the study. The training protocol consisted of 8-weeks with three weekly training sessions consisting of supervised HIIT in combination with biking and rowing. HIIT-sessions consisted of 5 × 1 min exercise blocks interspersed with 1 min rest, and shifted between blocks on cycle and rowing ergometers. The volume was increased from two to /uniFB01 ve blocks during the 8 weeks. In the present study, we included vastus lateralis muscle samples that were obtained 4 -5 days after the last HIIT session but 48 h after the last physical activity (a VO2 maxtest). The number of samples included for immunoblotting were as follows: 16 before and after HIIT from lean glucose-tolerant men, 15 before and after HIIT from glucose-tolerant men with obesity, and 13 before and after HIIT from men with T2D and obesity.

Graphical illustrations . Graphical illustrations were created in ©BioRender - biorender.com, as indicated in the /uniFB01 gure legends.

## Statistical methods

Results are presented as mean ± SEM with individual values shown, when feasible. Statistical differences were analyzed by ordinary one-way ANOVA, repeated/ordinary two-way ANOVA, or Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test, and Mann-Whitney test as applicable. Dunnett ' s multiple comparisons test or Š ídák ' s multiple comparisons test were used to evaluate signi /uniFB01 cant interactions in ANOVAs. Percentage change analysis was performed by Mean difference and 95% CI of difference calculated by Uncorrected Fisher´s LSD. Pearson correlation coef /uniFB01 cients were calculated. As statistical tests varied according to the dataset being analyzed, the respective tests utilized are speci /uniFB01 ed within the /uniFB01 gure legends. 0.05 ≤ p &lt; 0.1 were considered a tendency and p values &lt; 0.05 were considered signi /uniFB01 cant.

## Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Data availability

The authors declare that all data supporting the /uniFB01 ndings of this study are available within the paper (and its supplementary information /uniFB01 les). Source data are provided with this paper.

## References

## Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the technical assistance of Betina Bolmgren and Irene Nielsen, Martin Thomassen, and Roberto Meneses-Valdes (Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark), Anja Jokipii-Utzon (Institute of Sports Medicine, Bispebjerg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark), Michala Carlsson and Katrine Brantbjerg Mosegaard (Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark). We thank Vivian Shang for her assistance with the Drosophila experiments (Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia). We acknowledge Cristiano di Benedetto for preparing muscle samples for TEM analysis (Core Facility for Integrated Microscopy, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark). Wethank Professor Rudolf J. Wiesner for generously providing us with the MRPL12, MRPS18B, MRPS35 and YME1L1 antibodies (Institute of Vegetative Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany). The study was supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (grant NNF16OC0023418, NNF18OC0032082, and NNF20OC0063577 to L.S.; grant NNF22OC0074110 to A.M.F.), by Independent Research Fund Denmark to L.S. (#0169-00013B), by the European Union ' s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Marie Sk ł odowska-Curie grant agreement No 801199 to T.C.P.P. and E.A.R.), grants by Danish Council for Independent Research - Medical Sciences (4181-00078) and the Augustinus Foundation to H.P. and grants from the Independent Research Fund Denmark (2030-00007 A) and Lundbeck Foundation (R380-2021-1451) to S.H.R.

## Author contributions

T.C.P.P.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Visualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition; S.H.R.: Conceptualization; Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; E.H: Methodology, Investigation, Writing Review &amp; Editing; C.H.-O.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; D.R.-G.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; E.F.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; A.M.F.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; P.J.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; N.R.A.: Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; R.K.: Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; M.S.A.: Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; A.I.: Investigation, Writing -Review &amp; Editing; J.F.H.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; S.R.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; E.J.N.: Methodology, Writing -Review &amp; Editing; S.H.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; A.K.L.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; M.H.P.: Resources, Writing Review&amp;Editing; M.E.de.A.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; T.E.J.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; B.K.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; M.H.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; S.L.n: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; N.Ø.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; K.H.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; P.S.: Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; M.K.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; J.R.: Resources, Writing Review &amp; Editing; A.T.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; J.W.; Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; J.N.: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; K.Q.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; H.P.: Resources, Writing - Review &amp; Editing; E.A.R.: Resources, Investigation, Writing - Review &amp; Editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition; L.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft, Project administration, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

## Competing interests

Since the study concluded, Solvejg Hansen, Jens Frey Halling and Anders Krogh Lemminger have become employees and shareholders of Novo Nordisk A/S, Denmark. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Lykke Sylow.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer review /uniFB01 le is available.

Publisher ' s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af /uniFB01 liations.

Tang Cam Phung Pham 1,2 , Steffen Henning Raun 2 , Essi Havula 3 , Carlos Henriquez-Olguín 1,4 , Diana RubalcavaGracia 5 , Emma Frank 2 , Andreas Mæchel Fritzen 1,2 , Paulo R. Jannig 6 , Nicoline Resen Andersen 1 , Rikke Kruse 7 , Mona Sadek Ali 2 , Andrea Irazoki 2 , Jens Frey Halling 8 , Stine Ringholm 8 , Elise J. Needham 9 , Solvejg Hansen 1 , Anders Krogh Lemminger 1 , Peter Schjerling 10,11 , Maria Houborg Petersen 7 , Martin Eisemann de Almeida 7,12 , Thomas Elbenhardt Jensen 1 , Bente Kiens 1 , Morten Hostrup 1 , Steen Larsen 2,10,11,13 , Niels Ørtenblad 12 , Kurt Højlund 7,14 , Michael Kjær 10,11 , Jorge L. Ruas 6 , Aleksandra Trifunovic 15 , Jørgen Frank Pind Wojtaszewski 1 , Joachim Nielsen 12 , Klaus Qvortrup 2 , Henriette Pilegaard 8 , Erik Arne Richter 1 &amp; Lykke Sylow 1,2

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modi /uniFB01 ed the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article ' s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.