48&gt;106&gt;302&gt;112&gt;Christoph J. Burckhardt,1,2* John D. Minna,3 and Gaudenz Danuser,1,2,4,*

48&gt;114&gt;339&gt;125&gt;1 Lydia Hill Department of Bioinformatics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA *Department of Cell Biology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA

48&gt;126&gt;442&gt;143&gt;*Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, Departments of Internal Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390,8593, USA

48&gt;144&gt;364&gt;150&gt;*Lead contact

48&gt;144&gt;364&gt;150&gt;*Lead contact

48&gt;151&gt;364&gt;157&gt;*Correspondence: christoph.burckhardt@gmail.com (C.J.B.), gaudenz.danuser@utsouthwestern.edu (G.D.)

48&gt;157&gt;178&gt;162&gt;https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2021.03.009

48&gt;191&gt;457&gt;275&gt;Cells probe their surrounding matrix for attachment sites via integrins that are internalized by endocytosis. We find that SH3BP4 regulates integrin surface expression in a signaling-dependent manner via clathrincoated pits (CCPs). Dephosphorylated SH3BP4 at S246 is efficiently recruited to CCPs, while upon Akt phosphorylation, SH3BP4 is sequestered by 14-3-3 adaptors and excluded from CCPs. In the absence of Akt activity, SH3BP4 binds GIPC1 and targets neuropilin-1 and α5/β1-integrin for endocytosis, leading to inhibition of cell spreading. Similarly, chemorepellent semapharonin-3a binds neuropilin-1 to activate PTEN, which antagonizes Akt and thus recruits SH3BP4 to CCPs to internalize both receptors and induce cell contraction. In PTEN mutant non-small cell lung cancer cells with high Akt activity, expression of non-phosphorylatable active SH3BP4-S246A restores semaphorin-3a induced cell contraction. Thus, SH3BP4 links Akt signaling to endocytosis of NRP1 and α5/β1-integrins to modulate cell-matrix interactions in response to intrinsic and extrinsic cues.

48&gt;306&gt;248&gt;402&gt;SH3BP4 (SH3 binding protein 4), also known as transferrin receptor trafficking protein, TTP) was cloned from human corneal fibroblasts and was found to be ubiquitously expressed (Dunlevy et al., 1999). Subsequently, SH3BP4 was associated with cellular compartments such as the plasma membrane and the nucleus (Khanobdee et al., 2004), lysosomes (Kim et al., 2012), flopodia (O'Loughlin et al., 2018), the perinuclear region (Antas et al., 2019), endosomes (Francavilla et al., 2013) and clathrincoated pits (CCPs) (Tosoni et al., 2005), indicating that localization and function of SH3BP4 are still diffuse. The N-terminal portion of SH3BP4 contains binding motifs for clathrin, dynamin-2, and Eps15 and was shown to bind these proteins (Tosoni et al., 2005). This has suggested that SH3BP4 might be implicated in clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME).

48&gt;403&gt;248&gt;474&gt;CME is the primary process for macromolecular uptake in most cells (Conner and Schmid, 2003). AP-2 adaptor complexes and clathrin triskelia assemble a protein coat at the plasma membrane, together with more than 30 accessory factors (Schmid and McMahon, 2007). Transmembrane receptors are sorted into CCPs via AP-2 and other adaptors (Traub, 2009). CME accessory factors regulate AP-2 complexes, generate and sense membrane curvature, stabilize or destabilize the clathrin coat, and orchestrate the recruitment of cargo and the GTPase dynamin (Mettlen et al., 2018). A multitude of mostly

257&gt;292&gt;457&gt;438&gt;weak and transient protein-protein and protein-phospholipid interactions keep coats adaptive to changing membrane curvatures (McMahon and Boucot, 2011). At the late stages, the mechanochemical GTPase dynamic assembles around the membrane neck for membrane fission, releasing the coated vesicle (Antony et al., 2016). Rapid phosphoinositide conversion triggers vesicle uncoating (He et al., 2017) and the vesicle and cargo enter endosomal sorting (Zerial and McBride, 2001). Among the many cargos internalized via CME are integrin cellmatrix attachment receptors (Moreno-Layseca et al., 2019). Integrins form heterodimeric complexes composed of α and β chains that exist in "closed," inactive and active, and "open" conformations to signal in a bidirectional way across the plasma membrane (Hynes, 2002). Integrins connect the extracellular matrix (ECM) via adhesions to the actysoin cytoskeleton (Schwartz, 2010). Tian and kindlin induce the high-affinity integrin conformation that promotes ECM binding, referred to as insideout signaling (Sun et al., 2019). Reciprocally, the abundance of integrin binding sites on ECM proteins leads to the formation of adhesion complexes, known as outside-in signaling (Kim et al., 2003).

257&gt;439&gt;457&gt;474&gt;While integrin activation and assembly of adhesion complexes are well studied (Vicente-Manzanares et al., 2009), it is less clear how integrins are inactivated. Protein complexes capturing the cytoplasmic portions of integrins are inducing the inactive conformation through inside-out-signaling (Bouvard et al.,

42&gt;432&gt;275&gt;437&gt;(A) Western blot (WB) analysis of RPE SH3BP4 KO and SH3BP4-GFP reconstitution cells.

42&gt;437&gt;451&gt;448&gt;(B) Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy of GFP ulations at CCPa. TdTomato-clathrin light chain a (Cica) was used as a CCP marker. Cytosolic GFP, cGFP.

42&gt;448&gt;451&gt;459&gt;(C) Fluorescence intensity in the 40-60 s CCP cohort (N = 3 experiments, n = 40 cells per condition) for SH3BP4-GFP and for negative controls soluble GFP, membrane GFP, and positive controls Eps15-GFP, Dyn2-GFP. The tdTomato-Cika cohort from SH3BP4-GFP for comparison.

42&gt;460&gt;393&gt;465&gt;(D) Percentage of GFP positive CCPs, from C, rank-sum tests of SH3BP4 versus all other constructs. Membrane-targeted GFP, mGFP.

49&gt;65&gt;248&gt;216&gt;2013). In addition, endocytosis is thought to play a major role in integrin homeostasis via the reduction of integrin exposure at the cell surface (Caswell et al., 2009). However, only a few interactions of bona fide CME accessory factors with integrins are established. A subset of x-integrin cytoplasmic tails interact with the μ 2 subunit of the AP-2 complex (De Franceschi et al., 2016). The β -integrin tails bind through their NPCx Motifs with protein-tyrosine binding domains in Dab2 (Teckchandani et al., 2009; Prunier and Howe, 2005) and Numb (Calderwood et al., 2003; Nishimura and Kabuchi, 2007). Additionally, a number of non-CME proteins were reported to bind in the Caswell (Tawell et al., 2009). Among them is GIPC1, a PDZ domain containing protein that targets neuron-1 (NRP1) and ε 2x and ε 6-integrin for endocytosis (Valderbi et al., 2009; Tani and Mercurio, 2001). However, it is not understood how GIPC1 connects with the CCP machinery. As with integrin activation, integrin endocytosis can also be triggered from outside ε -, by chemorepelles such as semaphromin-3a (Serini et al., 2003; Gioelli et al., 2018). The semaphromin ligands bind NRP1 receptors, which is thought to reduce Akt activity (Chadborn et al., 2006). Again, how these various signals impinge on the dynamics of endocytic integrin trafficking has remained elusive.

49&gt;217&gt;248&gt;316&gt;Here, we establish SH3BP4 as a central link between such signals and integrin endocytosis. We show that dephosphorylated SH3BP4 is efficiently accumulating at CCPs and enhancing NRP1 and ε 2-integrin endocytosis, thereby reducing cell adhesion. We also show that SH3BP4 endocytic activity is inhibited by Akt phosphorylation, and we establish the mechanism of both activation and interaction of SH3BP4. We propose that under conditions of reduced Akt signaling, cell attachment is weakened by an SH3BP4-dependent endocytic process whereby integrins are internalized. We show how the Akt-regulated SH3BP4 ties NRP1 stimulation by semaphromin ligands to the control of integrin endocytosis. Together, these data resolve numerous open questions regarding the integration of cellintrinsic and extrinsic signals and adhesion regulation.

49&gt;337&gt;248&gt;384&gt;SH3BP4 mutant S246A is targeted to CCPs We chose to study the subcellular localization of the protein product of SH3BP4 in human hTERT immortalized retinal pigment epithelium (PE) cells (Jiang et al., 1999). Since SH3BP4 expression was reported to be high in ocular tissues (Dunley et al., 1999). We used CRISPR/Cas9 to generate SH3BP4 knockout cells and expressed the SH3BP4-GFP fusion

49&gt;398&gt;456&gt;409&gt;(E) Number of SH3BP4 phosphory-peptides by mass spectrometry (N = 4 experiments), for pS131 (triangles) and pS246 (squares), mean = SEM are shown. Bottom: SH3BP4 domain architecture (Kokoszykita et al., 2009).

257&gt;64&gt;458&gt;183&gt;by lentirival transduction (Figure 1A). We applied live cell total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy to quantify the accumulation of SH3BP4-GFP at CCPs that were labeled by tDTomato-clathrin light chain a (Clca) (Figure 1B). The tDTomato-Clca signals were detected and tracked as previously described (Agut et al., 2013) (Figures S1A-S1E) and the SH3BP4-GFP signal at CCPs was followed over time (Figures 1C and S1F). For comparison, cytosolic and membrane-targeted GFP were recorded (Figure S1G). SH3BP4-GFP did not accumulate at CCPs (Figures 1B-1D and S1H-S1I). contrary to the bona fide CME accessory factors E15 and dynamin-2 (Dyn2) (Figure 1C) (Taylor et al., 2011). For both Eps15 and Dyn2, more CCPs were GFP positive (Figure 1D), had higher mean GFP intensity (Figure S1H), and showed more continuously positive CCPs than SH3BP4 (Figure S1I). This opened the possibility that the SH3BP4 presence at CCPs was regulated by additional mechanisms.

257&gt;184&gt;458&gt;385&gt;Indeed, by mass spectrometry, we found multiple phosphorylation sites, with serine-246 (S246) as the most phosphorylated residue (Figures 1E, S1J, and S1K; Table S1). To test how the phosphorylation status affected targeting of SH3BP4-GFP to CCPs, we mutated some of the most frequently observed phosphorylation sites (Table S1) to non-phosphorylatable alanine (A) or phosphomimic aspartic acid (D) residues and quantified SH3BP4-GFP accumulation at CCPs (Figures 1F and S1L). Most prominently, S246A and S246D exhibited enhanced colocation with CCPs. This site was previously reported to be susceptible to Akt phosphorylation (Clba et al., 2009; Reinartz et al., 2014) and fits an RxkRxSx Akt phosphorylation motif (Figure S1M; Table S2) (Manning and Cantley, 2007). Moreover, reports suggest that for Akt phosphorylation sites, aspartic and glutamic acid residues do not function as phosphomimic toward 14-3-3 adapter binding (Yip-Schneider et al., 2000) (examples in Table S3; Figure 2A), explaining why both mutants exhibited the same phenotype. Next, we asked to what extent the recruitment of non-phosphorylatable SH3BP4-GFP S246A was dependent on CME peptide motifs (Tosoni et al., 2005). Specifically, we mutated the clathrin binding motif (LIDL), the Dyn2 specific SH3 domain, and the Eps1-homolygom domain binding NPF motifs (SH3BP4-delta-CME), dCME. By reconstitution of the S246A/dCME mutants in the RPE SH3BP4 KO cells, we confirmed strong colocalization of the S246A construct with CCPs but reduced colocalization by S246A/dCME (Figures 1G and 1H). This suggested a contribution of the CME motifs to CCP targeting. Intensity profiles of individual CCPs indicated that the SH3BP4-GFP S246A localized to CCPs along their

42&gt;319&gt;398&gt;325&gt;(A) Immunoprecipitation (P) of SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A/D mutants for endogenous 14-3-3 (N = 6).

42&gt;325&gt;242&gt;331&gt;(B) IP of SH3BP4-GFP wt and R18 mutants for endogenous 14-3-3 (N = 4).

42&gt;331&gt;407&gt;337&gt;(C) Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy of SH3BP4-GFP wt and R18 mutants co-expressed with tdTomata-Cica. Scale bar 5 μm.

42&gt;337&gt;451&gt;343&gt;(D) Percentage of SH3BP4-GFP-Positive CCPs for SH3BP4-GFP wt and R18 mutants (N = 3, n = 42 cells each). For statistical analysis, rank-sum test was used.

42&gt;343&gt;267&gt;349&gt;data presented as box and whisker plots, n$\_{s}$ not significant, "p

42&gt;350&gt;283&gt;356&gt;(E) IP of SH3BP4-GFP for endogenous 14-3-3 with Akt1-wHA overexpression (00) (N = 5).

42&gt;356&gt;451&gt;362&gt;(F) IP of 14-3-3-3-GFP for HA-SH3BP4 with Akt1-wHA (0x N = 5). For the IP experiments, representative data are shown and statistics of IP data are in Figure S2.

42&gt;371&gt;242&gt;427&gt;Lifetime (Figure 1). The S246A mutant also showed more continuously positive CCPs (Figure 1 J) and higher mean SH3BP4-GFP intensity at CCPs (Figures 1K, 1L, and S1N). The efficient localization of S246A to CCPs was also apparent in a different RPE cell line and in a human vasculodermathelostenoidal (Figures S10 and S11), implying that this observation can be generalized. In summary, these data suggest that the phosphorylation status at S246 regulates the incorporation of SH3BP4 into CCPs.

42&gt;441&gt;242&gt;476&gt;Our data indicated that phosphorylated SH3BP4 was blocked from CCP accumulation, so we sought to elucidate the mechanism of SH3BP4 inhibition. It was previously reported that SH3BP4 binds 14-3-3 adaptor proteins via phosphorylated S246 (Chiba et al., 2009) and the amino acid sequence

257&gt;371&gt;451&gt;476&gt;RSKPSY6S1, around s246 overlaps with 14-3-3 consensus binding motifs (Yaffe et al., 1997) where the phospho-group is captured by a 14-3-3 (Muslin et al., 1996). Indeed, all isoforms of 14-3-3 bound SH3BP4 (Figures S2A and S2B). To confirm the interaction of SH3BP4 with the 14-3-3 isoform, we overexpressed SH3BP4-GFP and probed for binding of endogenous 14-3-3 (Figures 2 A, S2C, and S2D). Consistent with previous findings, the non-phosphorylatable S246A mutant did not bind 14-3-3 (Chiba et al., 2009). To further study the putative loss of function caused by the interaction with 14-3-3, we introduced into SH3BP4 a 20-amino-acid peptide R18, which constitutively binds 14-3-3 (Wang et al., 1999) (Table S4). The R18 peptide was introduced upstream of S246 where it replaced a stretch of less conserved amino acids in SH3BP4 (Figure S2E). As expected, SH3BP4-GFP R18 pulled down endogenous 14-3-3 efficiently,

48&gt;65&gt;249&gt;112&gt;while the mutant R18-KK peptide did not (Figures 2B and S2F). The S246A/R18 construct with only one 14-3-3 binding site, showed reduced 14-3-3 binding in accordance with a model where multiple 14-3-3 binding sites enhanced the interaction with the dimeric 14-3-3 adaptors (Yaffe, 2002). This notion was further supported with an SH3BP4 construct containing two R18 sites that more strongly bound 14-3-3 (Figures S2G and S2H).

48&gt;113&gt;249&gt;183&gt;We then tested the effect of R18-mediated 14-3-3 binding on SH3BP4 targeting to CCPs. The S246/R18 construct, where 143-3 proteins could bind both a phosphorylated S246 and the R18 peptide, was exactly excluded form CCPs (Figures 2C, 2D, and S2I). The construct S246A/R18 where 14-3-3 only bound once at the peptide sequence was found at CCPs as frequently as the wt protein, and the S264A/R18-KK mutant was recruited to CCPs as efficiently as the S246A mutant, consistent with abolished 14-3-3 binding. These data suggested that 14-3-3 binding to the SH3BP4 pS246 site strongly inhibited the incorporation into CCPs.

41&gt;405&gt;451&gt;423&gt;(A) Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy of SH3BP4-GFP wt and clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) mutants at clathrin-coated pits (CCPs) (N = 3 experiments, n = 45 cells per condition). Clathrin heavy-chain binding site (LDL), dynamin-2 binding (SH3BP), and Eps15 binding sites (NPF, all three) mutated. All mutations combined in dCME.

41&gt;423&gt;308&gt;429&gt;(B) Immunoprecipitation (IP) of Eps15, Dyr2, and CHC-TD GFP fusion proteins for HA-SH3BP4 (N = 5).

41&gt;429&gt;260&gt;435&gt;(C) IP of SH3BP4-GFP R18 mutants for HA-EPS15 and endogenous 14-3-3 (N = 6).

41&gt;435&gt;308&gt;441&gt;(D) IP of SH3BP4-GFP for HA-EPS15 and endogenous 14-3-3 with Akt1-wt-HA overexpression (N = 6).

41&gt;442&gt;345&gt;447&gt;(E) TIRF microscopy of SH3BP4-GFP 642A with Eps15-SNAP and tDtoMato-Clica as CCP marker. Scale bar: 5 μm.

41&gt;448&gt;382&gt;453&gt;(F) Example tracks of a CCP positive for both SH3BP4-GFP S246A and Eps15-SNAP data from (E) Intensity in arbitrary units (AU).

41&gt;454&gt;451&gt;466&gt;(G) Percentage of SH3BP4-GFP (W or S246A) and/or Eps15-SNAP positive CPs, data from (E) N = 3 experiments with n = 45 cells in total. For IPs, representative data are shown and statistics are in Figure S3. For statistics rank-sum test was used and box and whisker plots are shown (A and G), ns, not significant,

41&gt;466&gt;115&gt;471&gt;"p

48&gt;425&gt;368&gt;430&gt;(A) Numbers of peptides for SH3BP4-binding partners by mass spectrometry (N = 3 experiments), mean ± SEM are shown.

48&gt;430&gt;309&gt;435&gt;(B) Immunoprecipitation (IP) of endogenous SH3BP4 versus endogenous GIPC1 in RPE cells (N = 2).

48&gt;435&gt;173&gt;440&gt;(C) IP of SH3BP4-GFP for GIPC isoforms (N = 4).

48&gt;440&gt;228&gt;445&gt;(D) Pull down of purified GST-SH3BP4 versus purified GIPC1 (N = 3).

48&gt;445&gt;265&gt;450&gt;(E) IP of GFP-GIPC1 wt and PD2 domain mutant LG/AA for HA-SH3BP4 (N = 3).

48&gt;450&gt;182&gt;455&gt;(F and G) IP of GFP-GIPC1 fragments for HA-SH3BP4 (N = 3).

48&gt;455&gt;203&gt;460&gt;(H-K) IP of SH3BP4-GFP fragments for HA-GIPC1 (N = 3).

48&gt;460&gt;447&gt;465&gt;(J) IP of SH3BP4-GFP fragments for HA-GIPC1 and endogenous 14-3-3 (N = 5). For IPs, representative data are shown and statistics are in Figure S4.

42&gt;436&gt;450&gt;447&gt;(A) Immunoprecipitation (IP) of GFP-NRP1 cytoplasmic tail, wt, and dSEA for HA-GIPC1 wt and dPDZ mutant (LGL/AAA) and HA-SH3BP4 (N = 5 experiments). Long (L) and short (S) exposure of the HA-GIPC1 IP blot are shown.

42&gt;447&gt;316&gt;453&gt;(B) IP of GFP-NRP1 cytoplasmic tail for HA-GIPC1 wt and dPDZ and HA-SH3BP4 wt and mutants (N = 6).

42&gt;453&gt;329&gt;459&gt;(C) IP of GFP-NRP1 wt and dSEA cytoplasmic tails for HA-GIPC1 and HA-SH3BP4 wt and R18 mutants (N = 5).

42&gt;460&gt;370&gt;466&gt;(D) IP of GFP-NRP1 wt and dSEA cytoplasmic tails for HA-GIPC1 and HA-SH3BP4 wt with overexpression of Akt1-wt-HA (N = 8).

42&gt;466&gt;194&gt;472&gt;(E) Micrographs for the uptake of NRP1. Scale bar, 10 µm.

49&gt;64&gt;248&gt;239&gt;Xenopus laevis where XGIPC was also found to regulate x$\_{2}$/B1 integrin endocytosis (Spolice et al., 2010). Furthermore, NRP1 neither has a conserved NPXY nor a Xxx motif, which would promote interactions with the Dab2/Numb and AP-2 adapters, respectively (De Franceschi et al., 2016). This suggests GIPC1 could play an important role in NRP1 internalization (Figure S4A; Table SS) (Pang et al., 2014). However, it is not clear how GIPC1 is targeted to CCPs. To explore whether SH3BP4 could form a complex with GIPC1 and NRP1 simultaneously, the cytoplasmic portion of NRP1 was fused to GFP and the fusion bound GIPC, indeed. Interestingly, anti-BNP1 antibody was increased ~2-fold in the presence of SH3BP4 (Figure S5 and S5A). but SH3BP4 did not bind NRP1 in the absence of GIPC1 (Figure S5A). while the dCME mutation had no effect on the formation of the NRP1/GIPC1/S SH3BP4 complex, the S246A mutation enhanced the incorporation of both GIPC1 and SH3BP4 (Figures S5B and S5C), suggesting that SH3BP4 phosphorylation at S246 improved GIPC1/ NRP1 binding. Further supporting these findings, SH3BP4-R18 was only poorly pulled down by GFP-NRP1 (Figures 5C and S5D). Moreover, GFP-NRP1 pulled down less GIPC1 and SH3BP4 under Akt overexpression (Figures 5D and S5E). Together, these data suggested that the interaction of GIPC1 with the NRP1 cytoplasmic portion was enhanced by SH3BP4, but inhibited by 14-3-3 adapters, further highlighting the importance of the Akt phosphorylation.

49&gt;239&gt;248&gt;344&gt;To test whether SH3BP4 was mediating NRP1 endocytosis, we established an anti-BNP1 antibody in RPE cells that were serum starved for 12 h, to suppress Akt activity (Figures 5E and SS5). In RPE NRP1 KO cells no antibody was internalized, while reconstitution with GFP-NRP1 in the NRP1 KO cells significantly increased antibody internalization (Figures SS5G and SS5H). Knockdown of CHK by sIRALINAzed NRP1 uptake take, suggesting a CME-dependent uptake mechanism (Figures S51 and S5J). Both in RPE GIPC1 KO and in SH3BP4 KO cells (Figure 5F), NRP1 internalization was reduced (Figure 5G). When the SH3BP4 KO cells were reconstituted with SH3BP4 GFP mutants, both wt and S246A restored NRP1 uptake in starved cells, while dCME did not (Figure 5H). This supported a model where SH3BP4 together with GIPC1 were mediating NRP1 internalization by CME.

49&gt;344&gt;248&gt;407&gt;Like NRP1, the a5-integrin cytoplasmic domain has a highly conserved C-terminal SID/EA' motif that binds the GIPC1 PDZ domain (Figure S5K; Table S2) (Tani and Mercurio, 2001). To test whether SH3BP4 was involved in z5-integrin endocytosis, we measured the uptake of an antibody against a5-integrin in RPE cells (Figures SS5L and SS5M). The a5-integrin uptake was strongly reduced in GIPC1 KO cells and restored with HIS8xGIPC1 reconstitution (Figures SS5N-SSP). Similarly, a5-integrin uptake was strongly reduced in SH3BP4 KO cells and restored

49&gt;418&gt;160&gt;423&gt;(F) Western blot of RPE knockout (KO) cells.

49&gt;423&gt;315&gt;429&gt;(G) Quantification of NRP1 uptake in RPE KO cells (N = 3 experiments), arbitrary units (AU).

49&gt;429&gt;325&gt;434&gt;(H) Quantification of NRP1 uptake in RPE KO cells reconstituted with SH3BP4-GFP wt and mutants (N = 3).

49&gt;434&gt;193&gt;439&gt;(I) Quantification of a5-integrin uptake in KO cells (N = 3).

49&gt;439&gt;345&gt;444&gt;(J) Quantification of a5-integrin uptake in RPE cells overexpressing constitutively active Akt1 (GFP-Akt1-cl, N = 3).

49&gt;444&gt;458&gt;475&gt;(K-M) Uptake assay for total of K-N, antibody NK-SAM-1, inactive (N = 3, antibody mAb11) and active (M = N,3, antibody SNAKA51) a5-integrin in RPE wt and SH3BP4 knockout cells, was quantitation was quantified as a fraction of the total surface a5-integrin, time in minutes (min). Mean sD are shown (K, L, and M): Student's t test was used. For statics (G, H, L, and J) rank-sum test was used; data presented as box and whiskers, n, not significant, p

257&gt;64&gt;458&gt;167&gt;upon reconstitution with either SH3BP4-GFP wt or S246A but only partially rescued by the dCME mutant (Figures S1 and S5-SSS). Finally, in RPE cells overexpressing constitutively active Akt, a5-integrin uptake was partially inhibited (Figures SJ and SST). Knockdown of CHC reduced a5-integrin internalization (Figures S51 and S5U). Finally, in a biochemical uptake assay, SH3BP4 mediated internalization was not specific toward active or inactive a5-integrin (Figures 5K-5M and S6A-S6C). As previously reported, GIPC1 was not specific for a z5-integrin subpopulation (Figures S6D-S6G), while NRP1 was required for the uptake of active a5-integrin (Figures S6H-S6K) (Valderri br et al., 2009). In summary, these data show that SH3BP4 does form a complex with the NRP1 C-termin and GIPC1 that is sensitive to Akt phosphorylation and that both NRP1 and z5-integrin endocytosis are dependent on SH3BP4.

257&gt;182&gt;458&gt;407&gt;Considering these findings, we hypothesized that active SH3BP4 could reduce z5-integrin steady-state cell surface expression. Cells overexpressing SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A exhibited reduced z5-integrin surface expression when analyzed by flow cytometry (Figure 6A). Next, the active a5-integrin surface expression on fibroectin-coated glass was measured (Humphries, 2009). SH3BP4 KO cells spread out to cover 70% more area than wt cells and exhibited more active a5-integrin (Figures 6B, 6C, and S6L). These effects were reversed by reconstitution of KO cells with wt SH3BP4-GFP. Importantly, the cell area was reduced by 52% in cells reconstituted with SH3BP4 S246A compared with cells reconstituted with SHT3BP4-GFP (Figure 6C). Expression of SH3BP4 S246A also reduced active a5-integrin (Figures 6B and 6C). To test whether the S246A inhibitory activity on spreading and active a5-integrins depended on GIPC1 and/or NRP1, the corresponding KO cells were analyzed with overexpression of S246A (Figures 6D and S6M). Expression of S246A had no effect on GIPC1 KO cell spreading or surface expression of active a5-integrins, suggesting that GIPC1 was required for the S246A activity. In contrast, in NRP1 KO cells, S246A expression reduced spreading as in wt cells, suggesting that SH3BP4 inhibition of spreading was not dependent on NRP1. Active a5/b1-integrins bind soluble fibroectin dimers and mediate the assembly of fibroectin fibrils (Mao and Schwarzbauer, 2005). Fibronectin matrix secretion and remodeling is a core functionality of fibroblasts, but it is also observed for endothelial cells. Human RPE cells display both epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics (Gan et al., 2016), and they formed networks of fibronectin fibrils (Figure 6E). In the absence of GIPC1 or SH3BP4, fewer cells displayed fibronectin fibrils and the remaining fibrils were shorter (Figures 6E and 6F), while NRP1 KO cells remained competent

41&gt;457&gt;241&gt;462&gt;(A) Surface expression of α5-integrin by flow cytometry (N = 4 experiments).

41&gt;463&gt;451&gt;474&gt;(B) Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy of fixed RPE cells after spreading for 20 min on fibronectin. SH3BP4 knockout (KO) and SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A mutant reconstitution. Actin and immunofluorescence (IF) for pacillin and active α5-integrin (N = 3, n = 30 cells each).

49&gt;64&gt;249&gt;126&gt;for fibril assembly. In SH3BP4 KO cells, the fibril formation was rescued by expression of SH3BP4-GFP wt or S246A mutant (Figure 6G). In human endothelial HMEC1 cells, SH3BP4 knockout also reduced fibronectin fibrilogenesis (Figures S6N-S6P), suggesting that the process of matrix remodeling is dependent on SH3BP4 across cell types. Together, these results support a model where SH3BP4 coordinated with GIPC1 regulates a5-integrin surface expression and fibronectin extracellular matrix remodeling.

49&gt;148&gt;249&gt;344&gt;NRP1 has been reported as a co-receptor for a variety of transmembrane proteins and as a receptor for a series of ligands, including the chemoreceptor semaphorin-3a (SEMA3A) (Lampropoulou and Ruhberg, 2014). SEMA3A binds NRP1 (He and Tessier-Lavigne, 1997; Kolodkin et al., 1997) leading to complex formation with Pleixin-A receptors (PlexinA-1) (Tahkashi et al., 1999; Tamagnone et al., 1999), which are GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) for Rap GTPases (Wang et al., 2012). Evidence is accumulating that endocytosis is required for SEMA3A-induced cell collapse (Jumey et al., 2002; Castellani et al., 2004; Fournier et al., 2000; Tojima et al., 2010; Giogli et al., 2018). In addition, NRP1 was shown to increase active zx5/b1-integrin endocytosis in a GIPC1 dependent manner (Valdemri et al., 2009) and SEMA3A stimulated active zx5-integrin uptake (Giocli et al., 2018). Interestingly, multiple reports suggest that semaphorin3 family proteins, including SEMA3A signaling, reduces Akt activity (Eickholt et al., 2002; Manns et al., 2012; Castro-Rivera et al., 2008; Chadborn et al., 2006). Moreover, overexpression of dominant-negative phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) C124S reduced SEMA3A induced growth cone collapse (Chadborn et al., 2006), while in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells SEMA3B signaling was blocked by high Akt activity (Castro-Rivera et al., 2008). Finally, NRP1 cytoplasmic tail was suggested to complex and activate PTEN upon semaphorin ligand binding (Delgoffe et al., 2013). Together, these data suggest that SEMA3A signaling reduces Akt activity and, conversely, that high Akt activity can antagonize SEMA3A induced cell collapse.

49&gt;344&gt;249&gt;420&gt;To confirm the effect of SEMA3A on Akt activity, we treated RPE wt cells with SEMA3A for 1 h and found a reduction in S473 phosphorylation (Figures 7A, 7B, and S7A). SEMA3A-induced cell collapse was inhibited in cells with clathrin heavy-chain knockdown, confirming that the process was CMP dependent (Figure S7B). Next, we set out to test the hypothesis that SH3BP4 was required for SEMA3A signaling. Serum-starred human RPE cells and HMEC1 cells were sensitive to SEMA3Ainduced contraction, when in SHE3BP4 KO cells, cell contraction was reduced (Figures 7C, D, and S7C). In RPE cells, SH3BP4 GFP wt and S246A rescued SEMA3A signaling, while dcMED did

49&gt;434&gt;243&gt;446&gt;(C) Quantification of cell area, paxillin, and active s5-integrin area from (B). (D) Quantification of spreading in RPE KO cells overexpressing SH3BP4-GFP S246A (N = 3, n = 30). (E) TIRF microscopy of RPE wt and SH3BP4 KO cells after 3 h on glass, fibrilitis stained (antiboldy NIK-SAM-1) for cell outlines.

49&gt;447&gt;154&gt;452&gt;(F) Quantification of fibronectin fibrils (FB).

49&gt;453&gt;456&gt;477&gt;(G) FF in RPE SH3BP4 KO and SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A reconstitution cells. The scale bar is 5 µm (B and E). Representative data are shown (C and D). For statistics Student's 1 test was used and data are presented as mean: SEM (A, and G), and GI; or rank-sum test was used and data are presented with box and whisker plots (C and DJs, not, not significant, p

257&gt;64&gt;458&gt;286&gt;not, suggesting that SH3BP4 was involved in a CME-dependent way (Figure 7D). RPE cells lacking NRP1 or GIPC1 were resistant to SEMA3A signaling (Figures S7D and S7E). Together, this suggested that GIPC1 and SH3BP4 were involved in SEMA3A signaling in a CME-dependent way. When serum-starred RPE cells expressing wild-type SH3BP4-GFP were observed by TIRF microscopy during SEMA3A signaling (Figure 7E), cells contracted over the 60 min of treatment (Figures 7F and 7G), preferentially from the cell edge that exhibited the highest SH3BP4-GFP localization (Figures S7F-S7N). In response to SEMA3A signaling, SH3BP4-GFP intensities at tdT0mato-Cia labeled CCPs increased compared with untreated cells, indicating enhanced recruitment of SH3BP4-GFP (Figure 7H). SH3BP4-GFP dCME was not recruited to CCPs by SEMA3A (Figure S7O). The SEMA3A-induced accumulation of SH3BP4-GFP to CCPs was also absent in NRP1 and GIPC1 KO cells (Figures S7P and S7O). When constitutively active Akt (Akt-ca) was overexpressed, RPE cells became resistant to SEMA3A-induced contraction (Figures 7I and SST) and Akt-ca-blocked SH3BP4-GFP accumulation at CCPs (Figure 7J). Finally, SEMA3A enhanced NRP1 uptake but not total s-integrin uptake, in line with previous reports suggesting that SEMA3A enhances the uptake of active az-integrin (Giocli et al., 2018) (Figures 7K and S7R). RPE cells lacking ARHGF1e2 for MYO6, two GIPC1 binding partners (Figure S4A; Table S5), had no effect on SH3BP4 mediated endocytosis of NRP1 or total sx5integrin and remained SEMA3A sensitive, indicating that these factors were not relevant for SH3BP4-mediated endocytosis or signaling (Figures S7S-S7Z). Together, these data suggest that SEMA3A signaling depends on SH3BP4-mediated endocytosis. Moreover, SEMA3A promotes SH3BP4 recruitment to CCPs to enhance endocytosis and cell contraction, and this process is blocked by high Akt activity.

257&gt;308&gt;458&gt;420&gt;During tumorigenesis and metastasis, cancer cells adapt to ever-changing microenvironments. At various stages during the transformation, cancer cells experience chemo-attractive and chemorepellent signals from the surrounding tissues (Capparucia and Tamagnone, 2009). To persist, the development of resistance mechanisms toward repellent signals is advantageous. In human lung cancer, the 3p21 locus is frequently deleted (Sekido et al., 1996; Senchko et al., 2004) and the semaphorin-3 family gene SEMA3B was identified as a tumor suppressor in this region (Tomizawa et al., 2001; Castro-Rivera et al., 2004; Ji et al., 2005; Kuroki et al., 2003). In NSCLC cell lines, SEMA3B suppressed Akt activity, whereas cells with high Akt activity were resistant to semaphorin signaling (Castro-Rivera et al., 2008). We hypothesized that SH3BP4 could play a role in this balance of SEMA3A signaling. To study the role of the SH3BP4 endocytic mechanism in SEMA3A signaling

41&gt;362&gt;438&gt;374&gt;(A) Western blot of semaphorin-3a (SEMA3A) versus phosphorylation of Akt Ser-473 (pS473). RPE wt cells. (B) Quantification of (A), mean s EM are shown and Student's t test was used (N = 4 experiments). (C) SEMA3A per RPE wt and SH3BP4 KO cell areas. (D) Quantification of (I) N = 3 experiments, n = 100 cells.

41&gt;378&gt;403&gt;383&gt;(E) Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy of RPE wt cells overexpressing (XO) SH3BP4-GFP wt treated for 60 min with SEMA3A.

41&gt;427&gt;118&gt;432&gt;**p

41&gt;441&gt;244&gt;476&gt;in NSCLCs (Figure S8A), we screened a series of NSCLC cell lines for protein expression, Akt activity, and SEMA3A sensitivity (Figures 8A-8C and S8B). As expected, cell lines with low PTEN expression showed increased Akt phosphorylation at Ser473 (pS473) and high pS473, in turn, correlated with resistance to

48&gt;407&gt;456&gt;418&gt;(A) Western blot (WB) analysis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells protein expression (N = 5 experiments, representative data, and statistics in sup -

48&gt;418&gt;328&gt;423&gt;plemental information). Mutations for TP53, KRAS/NRSAS (RAS), PTEN, and overexpression (OX) for MYC.

48&gt;423&gt;328&gt;428&gt;(B) Quantification of PTEN and Akt phospho-Ser473 (pS473) intensities from WBs in (A), arbitrary units (AU)

48&gt;428&gt;431&gt;433&gt;(C) NSCLC cell sensitivity to semaphorin-3A (SEMA3A) induced contraction (2-5 repeats per cell). p values above 0.05 indicate SEMA3A resistance.

48&gt;433&gt;328&gt;438&gt;(D) Effect of SEMA3A on, area of H157 wt and OX-GFP-PTEN (N = 3 experiments, n = 100 cells).

48&gt;438&gt;456&gt;449&gt;(E) Total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy of H157 wt cells expressing SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A and TdTomato-clathrin light chain a (Clica). Scale bar, 5 μ m.

48&gt;449&gt;386&gt;454&gt;(F) Quantification of (E) with SH3BP4-GFP signal at clathrin-coated pits (CCPs) (N = 3 experiments, wt n = 48 cells, S246A n = 49).

371&gt;465&gt;456&gt;470&gt;legend continued on next page)

42&gt;64&gt;243&gt;224&gt;to SEMA3A (Figures 8D and S8E). When SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A were expressed in H157 the mutant protein was efficiently targeted to CCPs as observed for RPE and endothelial cells (Figures 8E, 8F, S8F and S8G). To address how the reduction of Akt activity would affect SH3BP4-GFP recruitment to CCPs, SNAP-PTEN wt was overexpressed in H157 lowering Akt pS473 levels (Figure S8H). When analyzed by TIRF microscopy, SH3BP4-GFP accumulation at CCPs was elevated in the presence of exogenous PTEN expression (Figures 8G and S8I). This was consistent with the idea that reduced Akt activity would lead to increased SH3BP4 accumulation at CCPs. Finally, to address whether active non-phosphorylatable SH3BP4 S246A could restore SEMA3A sensitivity in H157, we generated SH3BP4 KO cells and reconstituted the cells with SH3BP4-GFP (Figure S8J). When the cells were challenged with SEMA3A for 1 h, the S246A mutant cells contracted (Figure 8H). Together, these data confirm the critical role of SH3BP4 in SEMA3A signaling und supports a model where high Akt activity leads to SEMA3A resistance by phosphorylating SH3BP4 at S246. These results suggest that in cancer cells with low PTEN and high Akt activities, SH3BP4 is inactivated and cells become resistant to semaphorin signaling because of impaired SH3BP4-mediated endocytosis.

42&gt;245&gt;243&gt;435&gt;This study establishes the CME accessory factor SH3BP4 as a central link between Akt signaling and cell-matrix adhesion regulation via endocytosis of NRP1 and 5 -integrins (Figure S8K). When dephosphorylated at S246, SH3BP4 accumulates at CCPs to target via GIPC to cell adhesion receptors for endocytosis. This reduces integrin surface expression and compromises cell-matrix attachment. Conversely, upon Akt phosphorylation of S246, SH3BP4 is sequestered by 14 -3-3 adaptor proteins and excluded from CCPs. This inhibits SH3BP4's endocytic function establishing Akt as a regulator of 5 -integrin surface availability. SH3BP4 not only translates via endocytosis the global Akt state to integrin surface expression but also functions as an integrator of signals from cell surface receptors that regulate integrin availability. Here, we show how the semaphorin SEMA3A via its receptor NRP1 activates SH3BP4 and promotes cell contraction, effects that are well established but have yet to be mechanically explained (Serin et al., 2003). Our data now indicate that acute exposure of cells to SEMA3A enhances SH3BP4 recruitment to CCPs and that SH3BP4 knockout reduces SEMA3A induced cell contraction (Figure 7). SEMA3A induced cell contraction is thought to depend mostly on NRP1 signaling (Gioeilli et al., 2018). Besides NRP1, SEMA3A also binds pleinA, which leads to the activation of the cytoplasmic GAP domain toward the Rap 1 GPTase (Wang et al., 2013; Gioeilli et al., 2018). SEMA3A reduces the activity of Rap1 and its various downstream effectors (Bos et al., 2001). This has been reported to inhibit cell migration but it does not trigger cell

42&gt;446&gt;450&gt;458&gt;(G) TIRF microscopy of H157 cells OX SH3BP4-GFP wt, with OX of SNAP-PTEN wt. Analysis of SH3BP4-GFP at CCPs (N = 4) for control (n = 60 cells) and SNAP-PTEN OX (n = 61).

42&gt;459&gt;450&gt;477&gt;(4) Effect of SEMA3A on cell area in H157 wt and SH3BP4 KO cells reconstituted with SH3BP4-GFP wt and S246A (N = 3, n = 100). For statistics mean a SEM is shown (B and C) or rank-sum test and box and whisker plots were used, a representative experiment is shown (D, F, G, and H, ns, not significant, p

252&gt;64&gt;450&gt;77&gt;contraction (Gioeilli et al., 2018). Our data support a model where SEMA3A signaling activates PTEN to reduce Akt activity.

252&gt;78&gt;450&gt;198&gt;Throughout tumorigenesis, cancer cells receive a plethora of signals from their microenvironment, including from chemopellents like semaphorins. We found that hyperphosphorylation of SH3BP4 at S246 by Akt contributes to SEMA3A resistance in NSCLCs. Conversely, reconstitution with the non-phosphorytatable mutant SH3BP4 sensitized cells for SEMA3A. These data offer mechanistic insight to earlier reports of semaphorin resistance in cells with high Akt expression. In NSCLCs, PTEN mutations were found in 1%-3% of lung adenocarcinoma patients and in up to 15%-22% of squamous cell carcinoma patients (Campbell et al., 2016; Cancer Genome Atlas Research, 2012, 2014, Sanchez-Vega et al. 2018). This suggests that a considerable fraction of NSCLCs could invoke a semaphorin resistance mechanism through the loss of PTEN together with enhanced Akt activity and inhibition of SH3BP4-mediated endocytosis. While hyperactivity Akt may be a frequent semaphorin resistance mechanism, other pathways may likely co-exist.

252&gt;199&gt;450&gt;309&gt;Most of the current models of CME describe a constitutive protein assembly process at the plasma membrane orchestrated by the adaptor AP-2 complex and clatinr together with a range of accessory factors with overlapping functionality (Schmid and McMahon, 2007). However, various receptors are not constitively loaded into CCPs. Thus, incorporation must be tightly controlled, yet mechanisms for such regulation have been elusive. Here, we describe how phosphorylation in response to cellintrinsic or extrinsic signaling via Akt selectively determines the incorporation of the accessory factor SH3BP4 into CCPs upon which NRP1 and α -integrins are internalized by CME. Most certainly, SH3BP4 only one among several CCP-associated factors that transiently engage with the CME machinery in response to signaling inputs. Our experiments now dissect the regulation for one of this vastly understudied class of CME adaptors with potentially central roles as an integrator of signaling and trafficking.

252&gt;323&gt;450&gt;435&gt;Interestingly, NRP1 endocytosis was previously shown to be sensitive to the nutritional state of cells, wherein, particularly, insulin signaling strongly inhibited the uptake of NRP1-binding ligands (Pang et al., 2014). Insulin binds the insulin receptor, followed by tyrosine-kinase activation, recruitment of IRS-1/2 adapters, and finally activation of PI3K and Akt (Haeusler et al., 2018). In independent, unrelated studies SH3BP4 S246 phosphorylation was reported to be enhanced by insulin signaling measured by mass spectrometry (Humphrey et al., 2013, 2015). These observations line-up with our data showing SH3BP4 as a central switch between PI3K/Akt signaling and endocytosis. However, Pang et al. found that their NRP1 peptide ligand attached to silver nanoparticles entered cells independent of the CME machinery but identified internalized particles in vesicles resembling macropnosomes (Pang et al., 2014). Although our data indicate that NRP1 is internalized in an SH3BP4- and

47&gt;65&gt;249&gt;91&gt;CME-dependent way, we cannot exclude the possibility that NRP1 follows alternative endocytic routes. The mode of internali -zation of NRP1 may depend on the nature of the ligand and the metabolic and signaling state of the cell.

48&gt;114&gt;249&gt;127&gt;Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

48&gt;326&gt;249&gt;338&gt;Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.devcel.2021.03.009 .

48&gt;357&gt;249&gt;431&gt;We thank Sandra Schmid for guidance on endocytosis experiments and for critically reading the manuscript. We thank members of the Danuser lab for helpful discussions. We thank Ross Tomaino from the Tapin Mass Spectrometry Facility at the Department of Cell Biology Cell Biology at Harvard Medical School for expert analysis. We thank Luc Girard for genomic analyses of lung cancer lines. We thank Nicolaus Loest for support with cell sorting cytometry analysis for this project on instruments in the Moody Foundation Flow Cytometry Facility at UT Western Medical Center. This project was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF), PAOP3D9 13696 and the Novartis Research Foundation (both to C.J.B.): Funding in the Danuser lab for this work was made available through NIH grants GM607230, GM073165, and GM136428. This work was supported by NIH Lung SPORE grant P50 CA070907 (U.D.M.)

48&gt;453&gt;249&gt;477&gt;C.J.B. conceived and designed the study and executed all experiments and analyses with overall scientific observation by G.D.; C.J.B. wrote the manuscript with substantial edits by G.D.; J.D.M. provided reagents, scientific guidance, and critical insights.

255&gt;65&gt;345&gt;70&gt;DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

255&gt;74&gt;457&gt;85&gt;The authors declare no competing interests. G.D. is a member of the editorial board of Developmental Cell.

255&gt;92&gt;324&gt;102&gt;Received: June 3, 2020 Revised: December 23, 2020

255&gt;103&gt;335&gt;108&gt;Accepted: February 27, 2021

255&gt;111&gt;329&gt;116&gt;Published: March 23, 2021

255&gt;138&gt;457&gt;154&gt;Adams, R.H., Lohmum, M., Klostermann, A., Betz, H., and Püschel, A.W. (1997). The chemopulsive activity of secreted semaphorins is regulated by furin -dependent proteolytic processing. EMBO J. 16, 6077-6086.

255&gt;158&gt;457&gt;175&gt;Aguef, T., Antonescu, C.N., Metten, M., Schmid, S.L., and Danuser, G. (2013). Advances in analysis of low signal-to-noise images link dynam in and AP2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint. Dev. Cell 26, 279-291.

255&gt;177&gt;457&gt;195&gt;Achter, Y., Barbars, S.M., Terlecky, L.J., Tang, K., Hardy, S., Mostov, K.E., and Schmid, S.L. (1996). Redundant and distinct functions for dynamin-1 and dynamin-2 isoforms. J. Cell Biol. 143, 187-1881.

255&gt;197&gt;457&gt;221&gt;Antas, P., Novellademus, L., Kucharska, A., Massie, I., Carvalho, J., Oukril, D., Nyee, E., Nolvel, M.I., and W.L.S.W. (2019). SH3BP4 regulates intestinal stem cells and tumorigenesis by modulating beta -catenin nuclear localization. Cell Rep. 26, 266-2273 et al.

255&gt;223&gt;457&gt;243&gt;Antony, B., Burd, C., De Camili, P., Chen, E., Daumke, O., Faelber, K., Ford, M., Frolov, V.A., Frost, H., Hanswien, J.E., et al. (2016). Membrane fission by dyn -namin; what we know and what we need to know. EMBO J. 35, 2270-2284.

255&gt;245&gt;457&gt;262&gt;Artino, P., Jornalagedda, M., Amold, K., Baratin, D., Casard, G., De Castro, E., Duval, S., Vogel, V., Fortier, A., Gasteer, E., et al. (2012). Expasy: SIB bioinformatics resource portal. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, W597-W603.

255&gt;264&gt;457&gt;281&gt;Beasouiel, S., Sillen, J., Vilber, J., Gerber, S., Rawth, J., and Gyll, S.P. (2006). A probability-based approach for high-throughput protein phosphorylation analysis and site localization. Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 1285-1292.

255&gt;283&gt;457&gt;295&gt;Bos, J.L., De Roji, J., and Redguist, K.A. (2017). Rap1 signalling: adhering to new models. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2, 369-377.

255&gt;297&gt;457&gt;310&gt;Bouaouria, M., Hardoums, D.S., and Calandwood, D.A. (2012). Talin and signaling through integrins. Methods Mol. Biosol. 75, 3275-347.

255&gt;312&gt;457&gt;329&gt;Bouvard, D., Powoures, J., De Francesch, N., and Ivadaska, J. (2013). Integrin integrators: balancing cellular functions in vitro and in vivo. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 143-4042.

255&gt;331&gt;457&gt;347&gt;Burn, R.C., Jensen, M.A., and Reed, B.C. (1999). Protein interactions with the glucose transporter binding protein GLUTC1BP that provide a link between GLUTC1 and the cytoskeleton. Mol. Biol. Cell. 0, 819-832.

255&gt;350&gt;457&gt;370&gt;Cahl, H., and Reed, R.P. (1999). Cloning and characterization of neuropilin-1-in -tracterating protein: a PSS-D/Sig/ZD-2O-1 domain containing protein that interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of neuronip-1. J. Neurosci. 19, 6519-6527.

255&gt;372&gt;457&gt;390&gt;Call, L. S., G.N. S.H.Y., Y. Ye, Y. Y., Yang, L. C., B. Zhou, O. L., Doo, D. Y., Tang, H., et al. (2019). LCE: an open web portal to explore gene expression and clinical associations in lung cancer. Oncogene 38, 2551-2564.

255&gt;392&gt;457&gt;421&gt;Calenderwood, D.A., Fujioka, Y., De Pereja, J.M., Garcia-Aviarez, B., Nakamoto, T., Margolis, B., Mcloglade, C.J., Lidington, L.C., and Ginsberg, M.H. (2003). Integrin beta cytoplasmic domain interactions with phosphotyrosine-binding domains: a structural prototype for diversity in integrin signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 2272-2271.

255&gt;423&gt;457&gt;448&gt;Campbell, J.D., Alexandrov, A., Kim, J., Walla, J., Berger, A.H., Pedamalla, C.S., Shukla, S.A., Guo, G., Brooks, A.N., Murray, B.A., et al. (2016). Distinct patterns of somatic genome alterations in lung adenocarcinomas and squal -mus carcinomatosis. Nat Genet 48, 607-616.

255&gt;450&gt;457&gt;467&gt;Cancer genome atlas research network (2012). Comprehensive genomic char -acterization of squamous cell lung cancers. Nature 489, 519-525.

255&gt;469&gt;457&gt;479&gt;Cancer genome atlas research network (2014). Comprehensive molecular profiling of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature 517, 543-550.

40&gt;62&gt;244&gt;73&gt;Capparuccia, L., and Tamagnone, L. (2009). Semaphorin signaling in cancer cells and in cells of the tumor microenvironment-two sides of a coin. J. Cell Sci. 122, 1723-1736.

40&gt;83&gt;244&gt;101&gt;Castellani, V., Falk, J., and Roughton, G. (2004). Semaphorin3A-induced receptor-endocytosis during axon guidance responses is mediated by L1 Cam. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 26, 89-100.

40&gt;103&gt;244&gt;122&gt;Castro-Rivera, E., Ran, S., Brekken, R.A., and Minna, J.D. (2008). Semaphorin 3B inhibits the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway through neuropilin-1 in lung and breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 68, 8295-8303.

40&gt;124&gt;244&gt;142&gt;Castro-Rivera, E., Ran, S., Thompson, P., and Minna, J.D. (2004). Semaphorin 3B (SEMA3B) induces apoptosis in lung and breast cancer, whereas VEGF16 antagonizes this effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 11432-11437.

40&gt;144&gt;244&gt;155&gt;Castwell, P.T., Vadrevu, S., Norman, J.C. (2009). Integrals: masters of slaves of endocytic transport. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 843-853.

40&gt;157&gt;244&gt;182&gt;Cermak, T., Doyle, E.L.E. Christian, M., Wang, L.Z., Zhang, Y., Schmidt, C. Baller, J.A. Somma, N.V., Bogdanove, A.J., and Voytas, D.F. (2011). Efficient design and assembly of custom TALEN and other TAL effector-based constructs for DNA targeting. Nucleic Acids Res 39, e82.

40&gt;184&gt;244&gt;202&gt;Chadborn, N.H., Ahmed, A.L., Holtz, M.R., Prinha, R., Dunn, G.A. Jones, G.E. and Eickholt, B.J. (2009). PTPN couples Sema3A signaling to growth cone collapse. J. Cell Sci. 179, 951-957.

40&gt;204&gt;244&gt;219&gt;Chiba, T., Kobara, M., Morata, H.E., and Ahle, S. (2009). TTP at Ser245 phosphorylation by AKT is required for binding to 14-3-3. J. Biochem. 145, 403-409.

40&gt;221&gt;244&gt;233&gt;Christianson, T.W., Skorski, R.S., Dante, M., Shero, J.H., and Hieter, P. (1992). Multifunctional yeast high-copy-number shuttle vectors. Gene F70, 119-1192.

40&gt;235&gt;244&gt;259&gt;Clark, K., Pankov, R., Travis, M.A., Askar, J.A. Mould, A.P., Craig, S.E., Newham, P., Yamada, K.M., and Humphreys, M.J. (2005). A specific alpha-beta1-integrin conformation promotes directional integrin translocation and fibronectin matrix formation. J. Cell Sci. 118, 291-300.

40&gt;261&gt;244&gt;273&gt;Connor, S.D., and Schmid, S.L. (2003). Regulated portals of entry into the cell. Nature 422, 37-44.

40&gt;275&gt;244&gt;292&gt;Cunningham, F., Auchathan, P., Akanni, W., Allen, J., Amode, M.R., Armean, L.M., Bennett, R.B., Bial, J. B., Litska, K., Boddu, S., et al. (2019). Ensembl 2019. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D745-D751.

40&gt;294&gt;244&gt;319&gt;De Franceschi, N., Arjonen, A., Elkhatt, N., Denessouik, K., Wrobel, A.G., Wilson, T.A., Poweilles, J., Montagnac, G., Owen, D.J., and Iaskava, J. (2016). Selective integrin endocytosis plays by determinants between the integrin alpha-chain and AP2. Nat. Struct. Biol. 23, 172-179.

40&gt;321&gt;244&gt;345&gt;Delgoffe, G.M., Woo, S.R., Tumis, M.L., E.Gravano, D.M., Guy, C., Overcace, A.E., Bettini, M.L., Vogel, P., Finkelstein, D., Bonnevier, J., et al. (2013). Stability and function of regulatory T cells is maintained by a neuropilin-1-semaphorin 4α-axis. Nature 507, 252-256.

40&gt;347&gt;244&gt;372&gt;Dunlevy, J.J., Berry, B.L., Bergnes, J.P., Sundarra, N., and Hassel, J.R. (1999). Cloning, chromosomal localization, and characterization of cDNA from a novel gene, SH3BP4, expressed by human corneal fibroblasts. Genomics 62, 519-524.

40&gt;374&gt;244&gt;391&gt;Dunin, K.C., Abaki-Keen, A.E., Pukey, F.R., and Heimeland, L.M. (1996). ARPE-19, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line with differentiated properties. Exp. Eye Res. 62, 155-169.

40&gt;393&gt;244&gt;410&gt;Edeinstein, A., Amodaj, N., Hoover, K., Vale, R., and Stuuman, N. (2010). Computer control of microprobes using using JAManer. Curr. Protoc. Mol. Biol. 92, 14.20.14.20.17.

40&gt;412&gt;244&gt;430&gt;Eickholt, B.J., Walsh, F.S., and Doherty, P. (2002). An inactive pool of GSK-3 at the leading edge of growth cones is implicated in semaphorin 3A signaling at J. Cell Biol. 157, 211-217.

40&gt;432&gt;244&gt;455&gt;El Mourabit, H. Point, P.-Koster, J., Sondemann, H. Wider, V., Wegener, E. A., Lapintine, E., Geerts, D., Georges-Llabouesse, E., Sonnerberg, A. A., and Aurnalley, M. (2002). The PDZ domain of TIP-2(GIPC) interacts with the C-terminus of the integrin alpha5 and alpha subunits. Matrix Biol. 27, 207-214.

40&gt;457&gt;244&gt;476&gt;Eng, J.K., Mccormack, A.L., and Yates, J.R. (1994). An approach to correlate tandem mass spectral data of peptides with amino acid sequences in a protein database. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 5, 976-989.

252&gt;62&gt;450&gt;86&gt;Ewing, RM., Chu, P., Elisma, F., U.L., Taylor, P., Clima, S., McBroomCerajewski, L., Robinson, M.D., O'Connor, L., Li, M., et al. (2007). Large-scale mapping of human protein-protein interactions by mass spectrometry. Mol. Syst. Biol. 3, 89.

252&gt;88&gt;450&gt;113&gt;Fournier, A.E., Nakamura, F., Kawamoto, S., Goshima, Y., Kalb, R.G., and Strittmatter, S.M. (2000). Semaphorin3A enhances endocytosis at sites of receptor-F-actin colocalization during growth core collapse. J. Cell Biol. 149, 411-422.

252&gt;115&gt;450&gt;140&gt;Francavilla, C., Rigbolt, K.T., Edmal, K.B., Cararo, G., Vemet, E., BekkerJensen, D.B., Stiercic, W., Wilston, M., Suntetøn, M., Bellucci, S., et al. (2013). Functional proteomics defines the molecular switch underlying FGF receptor-trafficking and cellular outputs. Mol. Cell 51, 707-722.

252&gt;142&gt;450&gt;166&gt;Gan, Z., Ding, L., Burchardt, C.J., Lowery, J., Martinsky, A., Sitterley, K., Mota, A., Costigola, N., Stark, G.C., Voytas, D.F., et al. (2016). Vimentin intermembrane filaments template microtubule networks to enhance persistence in cell polarity and directed migration. Cell Syst. 3 252-263.e8.

252&gt;168&gt;450&gt;185&gt;Gazdar, A.F., Grandlock, W., Loodrock, W.W., Lam, W.L., and Minna, J.D. (2010). Lung cell lines as tools for biomedical discovery and research. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 102, 1310-1321.

252&gt;187&gt;450&gt;212&gt;Giese, A.P., Ezan, W., Lang, L., Lauxv, L., Lebo, F., Mazzocco, C., Richard, E., Rabouil, J., Borg, J.P., Kelley, M.W., et al. (2012). Gipc1 has a dual role in Vang2 trafficking and hair bundle integrity in the inner ear. Development 139, 3775-3785.

252&gt;214&gt;450&gt;229&gt;Gietz, R.D., and Schiestl, R.H. (2007). Frozen competent yeast cells that can be transformed with high efficiency using the LiAC/SS carrier DNA/PEG method. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1-4.

252&gt;231&gt;450&gt;256&gt;Gioel, N., Maire, F., Camillo, C., Ghitti, M., Valdemberti, D., Morello, N., Darche, M.Z., Lentz, L.Cagnoni, G., Oluf, Y., et al. (2018). A rotationally designed NPP-independent superstring SEMA3A mutant is an effective anticancer agent. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaah870.

252&gt;258&gt;450&gt;283&gt;Hausier, R.A., Mcgraw, T.E., and Accl, D. (2018). Biochemical and cellular properties of insulin receptor signaling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 31-44. Han, S.Y., Kato, H., Kato, S., Suzuki, T., Shota, H., Ishli, S., Shiba, K., Matsuno, S., Kamaranu, R., and Ishioka, C. (2009). Functional evaluation of PTEN missense mutations using in vitro phosphoinositide phosphatase assay. Cancer Res. 60, 3147-3151.

252&gt;285&gt;450&gt;301&gt;Hyd, S., Kutama, M., Harris-Stanisal, T., Dol, and Philipps, M.L. (1997). Construction of adenovirus vectors through C-hex-rox recombination. J. Virol. 71, 1842-1849.

252&gt;303&gt;450&gt;315&gt;He, K., Marsland, R.I., Upadhyyala, S., Song, E., Dang, S., Caparo, B.R., Wang, W.S., Skillern, G., Radu, M., Ma, M., and Kirchhausen, T. (2017). Dynamics of phosphoinositide conversion in clathrin-mediated endocytic traffic. Nature 552, 410-414.

252&gt;317&gt;450&gt;328&gt;He, Z., and Tessier-Lavigne, M. (1979). Neuroin is a receptor for the axonal chemoreperceptible semaphromil 3I Cell, 90, 739-751.

252&gt;330&gt;450&gt;354&gt;Hornbeck, P.V., Zhang, B., Murray, M., Kobach, J.M., Latham, V., and Strypek, R.E. (2015). PhosphositePlus, 2014: mutations, PTMs and recalibrations. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D152-D250.

252&gt;356&gt;450&gt;367&gt;Huynh, S.J., Azim, S.B., and Mann, M. (2014). High-throughput phospho-proteomics reveals in vivo insulin dynamics. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 930-9905.

252&gt;396&gt;450&gt;415&gt;Humphrey, S.J., Yang, G., Yang, P., Fazakerle, D.J., Stöckill, J., Yang, J.Y., and James, D.E. (2013). Dynamic adipocyte phosphoproteome reveals that Apt directly regulates mTORC2. Cell Metab. 17, 1009-1020.

252&gt;417&gt;450&gt;428&gt;Humphries, M.J. (2009). Cell adhesion assays. Methods Mol. Biol. 52, 2023-210.

252&gt;430&gt;450&gt;441&gt;Hynes, R.O. (2002). Integrals: bidirectional, allosteric signaling machines. Cell 110, 673-687.

252&gt;443&gt;450&gt;463&gt;Jaqaman, K., Loeke, D., Mettén, M., Kuwata, H., Gristein, S., Schmid, S.L., and Danuser, Q. (2008). Robust single-particle tracking in live-cell time-lapse sequences. Nat. Methods 6, 956-720.

252&gt;465&gt;450&gt;476&gt;J.L., Minna, J.D., and Roth, J.A. (2005). 3p21.3 tumor suppressor cluster: prospects for translational applications. Future on. 101, 79-92.

48&gt;62&gt;249&gt;87&gt;Jiang, X.R., Jimenez, G., Chang, E., Frolkins, M., Kusker, B., Sage, M., Beeche, M., Bodnar, A.G., Wahl, G.M., Tsty, T.D., and Chui, C.-P. (1999). Telomerase expression in human somatic cells does not induce changes associated with a transformed phenotype. Nat. Genet. 21, 111-114,

48&gt;88&gt;249&gt;108&gt;Jurney, W.M., Gailo, G., Letoumaune, P.C., and McLoon, S.C. (2002). Rac1mediated endocytosis during eprhin-A2- and semaphromin 3A-induced growth cone collapse. J. Neurosci. 22, 6019-6028.

48&gt;110&gt;249&gt;122&gt;Katoh, M. (2013). Functional proteomics, human genetics and cancer biology of GIPC family members. Exp. Mol. Med. 45, e26,

48&gt;124&gt;249&gt;143&gt;Khanobede, K., Kolberg, J.B., and Dunley, J.R. (2004). Nuclear plasma membrane localization of SHBBP4 in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Mol. Vis. 10, 933-942.

48&gt;145&gt;249&gt;163&gt;Kim, M., Carman, C.V., and Sorringer, T.A. (2003). Bidirectional transmembrane signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301, 1720-1725.

48&gt;165&gt;249&gt;183&gt;Kim, Y.M., Stone, M., Hwang, T.H., Kim, Y.G., Dunley, J.R., Griffin, T.J., and Kim, D.H. (2012). SHBBP4 is a negative regulator of amino acid-grapT-PSTM1C1 signaling. Mol. Cell 46, 833-846.

48&gt;185&gt;249&gt;204&gt;Koloszykoska, K., Kryitsk, J., Rychlewis, L., and Wynycz, L.S. (2009). Unexpected domain composition of MACCC1 links MET signaling and apoptosis. Acta Biochem. Pol. 56, 317-323.

48&gt;206&gt;249&gt;218&gt;Kolodkin, A.L., Levengood, D.V., Rowe, E.G., Tal, Y.T., Giger, R.J., and Ginty, D.D. (1997). Neuroinulin is a semaphromin III receptor. Cell 90, 753-762.

48&gt;220&gt;249&gt;245&gt;Kuroki, T., Trapasso, F., Yandamu, S., Matsuya, A., Alder, H., Williams, N.N., Kaiser, L., and Crowe, C.M. (2003). Collatin loss on chromosome 3p21.3 and promoter hypermethyl of semaphromin 3B non-in small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res. 63, 3352-3355.

48&gt;247&gt;249&gt;259&gt;Lempouro, A., and Rubel, C.E. (2019). Neuroinulin regulation of acetonel esis. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 42, 1623-1628.

48&gt;261&gt;249&gt;285&gt;Lin, D.C., Quevedo, C., Brewer, N.E., Bell, A.T., J.R. Gimmes, M.L., Miller, F.D., and Kaplan, D.R. (2006). AP11 associates with TrkA and GIPC1 and is required for nerve function-mediated signal transduction. Mol. Cell Biol. 26, 8928-8941.

48&gt;287&gt;249&gt;306&gt;Liu, Y., Fisher, D.A., and Stom, D.R. (1994). Intracellular sorting of neuromodulin (GAP-43) mutants modified in the membrane targeting domain. J. Neurosci. 14, 5807-5817.

48&gt;308&gt;249&gt;326&gt;Loerke, D., Mettlen, M., Schmidt, S.L., and Danuser, G. (2011). Measuring the hierarchy of molecular events during clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Traffic 12, 815-825.

48&gt;328&gt;249&gt;352&gt;Liu, G., Zhang, Q., Huang, Y., Song, J.G., Tomaino, R., Ehrerberg, T., Lim, E., Liu, W., Bronson, R.T., Bowden, M., et al. (2014). Phosphorylation of ETS1 by Scc family kinases prevents its recognition by the COP1 tumor suppressor. Cancer Cell 26, 222-234.

48&gt;354&gt;249&gt;366&gt;Manning, B.D., and Cantley, L.C. (2007). AKT/PKB signaling: navigating downstream cell 129, 1261-1274.

48&gt;368&gt;249&gt;386&gt;Manns, R.P., Cook, G.M., Holt, C.E., and Keynes, R.J. (2012). Differing semaphron 3A concentrations trigger distinct signaling mechanisms in growth cone collapse. J. Neurosci. 32, 8554-8559.

48&gt;388&gt;249&gt;400&gt;Mao, Y., and Schwarzbauer, J.E. (2005). Fibronectin filogenesis, a cellmediated matrix assembly process. Matrix Biol. 24, 389-399.

48&gt;402&gt;249&gt;420&gt;Mcmahon, H.T., and Bouchort, E.C. (2011). Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 517-533.

48&gt;422&gt;249&gt;440&gt;Mettlen, M., Chen, P.H., Srinivasan, S., Danuser, G., and Schmid, S.L. (2018). Regulation of Clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 87, 871-896.

48&gt;442&gt;249&gt;466&gt;Mettlen, M., Loerke, D., Yarar, D., Danuser, G., and Schmid, S.L. (2010). Cargo- and adaptor-specific mechanisms regulate clathrin-mediated endocytosis. J. Cell Biol. 188, 919-933.

48&gt;468&gt;249&gt;478&gt;Moreno-Luesca, P., Icha, J., Hamid, H., and Ivaska, J. (2019). Integrin trafficking in cells and tissues. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 122-132.

258&gt;62&gt;457&gt;79&gt;Muslin, A.J., Tanner, J.W., Allen, P.M., and Shaw, A.S. (1996). Interaction of 14-3-3 with signaling proteins is mediated by the recognition of phosphorine. Cell 84, 889-897.

258&gt;81&gt;457&gt;114&gt;Nishimura, T., and Kabiuchi, K. (2007). Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with a pAPC and PAR-3. Dev. Cell 13, 15-28. O'Loughlin, T., Masters, T.A., and Buss, F. (2018). The MYO6 interactome reveals adaptor complexes coordinating early endosomes and cytokselateral dynamics. EMBO Rep. 19, e44488.

258&gt;116&gt;457&gt;134&gt;Oseogawa, A., Gills, J.J., Kawabata, S., and Dennis, P.A. (2017). Rapamycin receptors cancer cells to growth inhibition by the PARB inhibitor clonarch, Octoart8, 87044-87035.

258&gt;136&gt;457&gt;153&gt;Ought, R., Stark, C., Breitkutz, B.J., Rust, J., Boucher, L., Chang, C., Kolas, N., O'Donnell, L., G.G. Madsen, R.L., et al. (2019). The BioGRID interaction database: 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D529-D541.

258&gt;155&gt;457&gt;179&gt;Pang, H.B., Braun, G.B., Firman, T., Aziza-Banc, P., Ruidazia, M.E., Sugahara, K.N., Teisaluk, T., and Ruhoselli, E. (2014). An endocytosis pathway initiated through neurpon-11 and regulated by nutrirant availability. Nat. Commun. 5, 5904.

258&gt;181&gt;457&gt;198&gt;Park, J.S., Burchardt, C.J., Lazcano, R., Solis, L.M., Isogal, T., Li, L., Chen, C.S., Gao, B., Minna, J.D., Bacho, R., et al. (2020). Mechanical regulation of glycolysis via cykoskeleton architecture. Nature 578, 621-626.

41&gt;62&gt;244&gt;87&gt;Serini, G., Valdembrt, D., Zarivan, S., Mortera, G., Burkhardt, C., Caccavar, F., Zammataro, L., Primo, L., Tamagnone, L., Logan, M., et al. (2003). Class 3 semaphorins control vascular morphogenesis by inhibiting integrin function. Nature 424, 391-397.

41&gt;88&gt;244&gt;106&gt;Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., and Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal. Chem. 68, 850-858.

41&gt;108&gt;244&gt;127&gt;Skeene, J.H., and Virgl, L. (1989). Posttranslational membrane attachment and dynamic fatty acylation of a neuronal growth cone protein, GAP-43, J. Cell Biol. 108, 613-624.

41&gt;128&gt;244&gt;146&gt;Spicer, E., Suckert, C., Al-Attar, H., and Marsden, M. (2010). Integrin alpha5 beta1 function is regulated by XGIPC/Ke12 mediated endocytosis during Xenopus laevis gastrulation. PLoS One 5, e10665.

41&gt;147&gt;244&gt;171&gt;Srinivasan, S., Burkhardt, C.J., Bhave, M., Chen, Z., Chen, P.H., Wang, X., Danuser, G., and Schmid, S.L. (2018). A noncanonical role for dynamin-1 regulating early stages of clath-mediated endocytosis in non-neuronal cells. PLoS Biol. 16, e2005377.

41&gt;172&gt;244&gt;184&gt;Sun, Z., Costel, M., and Fassler, R. (2019). Integrin activation by talin, kindlin and mechanical forces. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 25-31.

41&gt;185&gt;244&gt;203&gt;Takahashi, T., Foumier, A., Nakamura, F., Wang, L.H., Murakami, Y., Kalb, R.G., Fujisawa, H., and Strittmatter, S.M. (1999). Xanapin-prolin-1 complexes form functional semaphoran-3 receptors. Cell 99, 59-60.

41&gt;204&gt;244&gt;230&gt;Tamangone, L., Artigiani, S., Chen, H., He, Z., Ming, G.L., Song, H.C., Chotaladi, A., Winberg, M.L., Goodman, C.S., Poo, M.B., et al. (1999). Plexis are a ligand family of receptors for transmembrane secreted, and GPI-anchored semaphorins in vertebrates. Cell 99, 71-80.

41&gt;231&gt;244&gt;255&gt;Tan, T.T., and Mercurio, A.M. (2001). POD2 interaction sites in integrin alpha subunits. T14853, TIP/GIPC binds to a type I region sequence in alpha 6A/alpha 5 and a novel search in alpha 6B. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 36535-36542.

41&gt;256&gt;244&gt;274&gt;Taylor, M.J., Perrais, D., and Merfield, C.J. (2011). A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of Mammalian clathrin-mediated endocytosis. PLoS Biol. 9, e1000604.

41&gt;275&gt;244&gt;293&gt;Teckchandiani, A., Toda, N., Goodchild, J., Henderson, C., Watts, J., Wollscheid, B., and Cooper, J.A. (2009). Quantitative proteomics identifies a Dab2/integrin module regulating cell migration. J. Cell Biol. 186, 99-111.

41&gt;294&gt;244&gt;306&gt;Tojima, T., Tofusa, R., and Kaniguchi, H. (2010). Asymmetric clathrin-mediated endocytosis drives repulsive growth cone guidance. Neuron 66, 370-377.

41&gt;307&gt;244&gt;339&gt;Tomizawa, Y., Sekido, Y., Kondo, M., Gao, B., Yokota, J., Roche, J., Drabkin, H., Lerman, M.J., Gazdar, A., and Minna, J.D. (2001). Inhibition of lung cancer cell growth and induction of apoptosis after reexpression of 3p12.31 candidate tumor suppressor gene SENIAB3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 13954-13959.

41&gt;340&gt;244&gt;362&gt;Tosoni, D., Puri, C., Confalonieri, S., Saiclin, A.E., De Camill, P., Taochetti, C., and Di Fiore, P.P. (2005). TTP specifically regulates the internalization of the transferrin receptor. Cell 123, 675-888.

253&gt;62&gt;451&gt;73&gt;Trabu, L.M. (2009). Tickets to ride: selecting cargo for clathrin-regulated internazation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 583-596.

253&gt;75&gt;451&gt;101&gt;Tuladhar, R., Yeu, Y., Pizza, J.T., Tan, Z., Clemenceau, J.R., Wu, X., Barrett, Q., Herbert, J., Mathews, D.H., Kim, J., et al. (2019). CRISPR/Cas9-based mutagenesis frequently provokes on-target RNA misregulation, microbiota. Rev. https://www.bionix.org/content/10.1101/S38138v1.full.

253&gt;103&gt;451&gt;114&gt;UniProt Consortium. (2019). UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D506-D515.

253&gt;119&gt;451&gt;143&gt;Valdembrt, D., Caswell, P.T., Anderson, K.I., Schwarz, J.P., König, I., Astanina, E., Caccavari, F., Foman, J.C., Humphries, M.J., Bussolino, F., and Serini, G. (2009). Neuroinulin-1/GAP1C1 signaling regulates alpha5beta1t integrin traffic and function in endothelial cells. PLoS Biol. 7, e225.

417&gt;43&gt;456&gt;53&gt;Article

48&gt;183&gt;458&gt;196&gt;Requests for reagents, data, and software should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Gaudenz Danuser (Gaudenz, Danuser@utsouthwestern.edu)

48&gt;210&gt;201&gt;216&gt;Materials are available upon reasonable request.

48&gt;232&gt;458&gt;245&gt;Data is available upon reasonable request. The cmeAnalysis software was previously deposited on Github (https://github.com/ DanuserLab/cmeAnalysis).

48&gt;274&gt;458&gt;434&gt;The human retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE) immortalized with human Telomerase (hTERT) (Jiang et al., 1996) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (hTERT RPE, sex: female, ATCC, Manassas, VA, CRL-4000) and grown in Dulubecco's Modified Eagle Medium DEM/F-12 (1:1, Gibco, 11330-032), 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma F0926) and antibiotic-antimycinotic (AA, Gibco, containing 10,000 units/mL, penicillin, 10,000 μg/mL streptomycin 25 μg/mL amphotericin B, 15240062). Human retinal pigment epithelium ARPE-19/HPV-16 cells were obtained from ATCC (CRL-2502, sex: male). ARPE-19/HPV-16 cells are ARPE19 cells transformed with human papillomavirus-16 DNA by transfection (ATCC). The parental ARPE-19 cell line arose spontaneously in culture (Dunn et al., 1996). Cells were maintained in DEM/F-12, 10 % FBS and AA. Human brain microvascular endothelial cells hCMEC/D3, that were originally immortalized with hTERT and SVA0 large Tantigen (Weksler et al., 2005) were obtained from Millipore (Millipore, SCC066, sex female). Cells were grown in EndoGRO-MV Media Kit (Millipore, SCCMEO04) according to manufacturer's instructions. Human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells Lenti-X293T (Gibco, 632180) were grown in DEMM (Gibco, 11995-065), supplemented with 10 % FBS and AA. Human dermal microvascular endothelial cells HEC11 were obtained from ATCC (CRL-3243; sex male) and grown in MCDB 131 medium (Gibco, 10372019) supplemented with microvascular growth supplement (Gibco, S00525). The non-small cell lung cancer (SNLC) cell A549 (sex: male), H1299 (male), H2009 (female), H157 (male), HCC193 (female), HCC44 (female), H1473 (NA), H1819 (female) and H2052 (male) were obtained from the Harmon Cancer Center Collection (UT Southwestern Medical Center) and described previously (Gazdar et al., 2010). Cell line identity was confirmed by DNA fingerprinting (PowerPlex 1.2 Kit, Promega) and mycoplasma-free status was verified by PCR (e-Myco Kit, Boca Scientific, 25235). Cells were grown in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (Gibco, RPMI) 1640 medium (Gibco, 11875-093) supplemented with 5 % FBS and AA. All cells were cultured in humidified incubators (Nuare) with 5 % CO$\_{2}$ at 37 ' Celsius (37 ' C). For starvation experiments, cells were cultured in serum free and low glucose DME (Gibco, 11885-084) with 1 g/L D-glucose and AA. For passing, cells were washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4, composed of 137 mM NaCl (Research Products International, RP1, S23020), 2.7 mM KCl (Fisher Scientific, BP366), 10 mM NaH$\_{2}$PO$\_{4}$ (RPI, S23010), 1.8 mM KH$\_{2}$PO4 (Fisher Scientific, BP362), incubated in 0.5 % trypsin-EDTA solution (GIBCO, 15400-054) until cells detached and resuspended in full medium. Cell concentrations were determined using an automated cell counter (Cellometer Auto 1000, Nexcelom, Lawrence, MA).

48&gt;463&gt;458&gt;476&gt;For expression of the SHEB3P4-GFP fusion constructs, full length proteins, and truncated proteins, human SH3BP4 cDNA (Thermo Scientific, pCMV-SPORT6 clone ID 6138465) was amplified using forward and reverse priming DNA oligonucleotides (IDT DNA,

42&gt;63&gt;451&gt;283&gt;Coraville, IA, for all oligonucleotides see Table S6) with EcoRI and KpnI restriction sites by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using PFU ultra II Fusion HS DNA polymerase (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, 600674-51), dNTP mix (BioBasic, D0005) in a thermal cycler (BioRad, Hercules, CA, C1000 Touch, 1851148). PCR products were purified on 1 % agarose gels (Fisher Scientific, BP160) in Tris-acetic acid-EDTA (TAE) buffer containing 40 mM Tris (Fisher Scientific, BP152), 20 mM glacial acetic acid (Fisher, BP2401SI-212) and 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, di-Sodium salt dihydrate (EDTA, Fisher Scientific, BP120) with ethidium bromide (BioRad, 16110433) by electrophoresis (Bio-Rad, 1704406). Gels were imaged on a GBOX imaging system with a Synoptics 4.2 MP camera and Genesys software (all Syncgene, Frederick, MD). DNA bands were excised and solubilized in PB/QG buffer composed of 3M guanidine-thiocyanate (Sigma, G277), 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.5, 6 % ethanol (Pharmaco, 111000190). DNA was purified on mini spin columns (Sydlab, Natick, MA, MB082) and eluted in ultrapure water (Millipore Sergy UV, Biopak filter CDUFBIO01). The pEGFP-N1 vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, 6085-1) was first modified at position alanine-206 of EGFP by site directed mutagenesis (as described below, for oligonucleotides see Table S6) to introduce an alanine to lysine (Anew England Mutation) (Anew Mutation) (B. R1301) and PCR DNA were digested with EcoRI-HF (New England Blasco, NEB, JBPSW, MA, R3101) and KpnI-HF (NEB, R3142) in cutstrum buffer (NEB, MB7204) at 37 °C according to manufacturer protocols. Plusmid DNA was dephosphorylated with calf intestinal phosphase (CIP, NEB, MB0290) at 37 °C and purified on a 1 % agarose gel as described above. Plasmid and PCR DNA were ligated with T4 ligase (NEB, MB0202) at room temperature for 10 min followed by prolonged incubation at 16 °C in the thermal cycler. Ligation products were transformed into XL-1 blue E. coli cells (Agilent, 2002325) by a 10 min incubation on ice, followed by 90 seconds heat shock at 42 °C in a water bath (Thermo Scientific) before cells were chilled again on ice. Cells were grown out in Luria-Bertani broth (LB broth Miller, Mipilée 753-5) medium and plated on LB-agarose plates containing 10 µg/ml Kamycin sulfate (Fisher Scientific, BP906-5) for selection. The next day, colonies were collected and grown in LB medium in the presence of 10 µg/ml Kamycin. Cultures were harvested and plasmid DNA was extracted using standard DNA extraction protocols and spin columns (Sydlab). The DNA was analyzed by restriction digest and constructs containing the insert of the expected size were sequenced (Genewitz, Southwest Plainfield, NJ). To introduce amino acid changes in the pEGFP-N1 SH3BP4-FGP construct at motifs relevant for clathrin mediated endocytosis and at phosphorylation sites, standard site directed mutagenesis protocols were applied, using PFU Ultra II DNA polymerase and oligonucleotides containing the respective altered nucleotides (DTI DNA for, oligonucleotides see Table S6). Briefly, oligonucleotides were annealed in a temperature gradient ranging from 55-68 °C; DNA was amplified at 68 °C for one min kilobase of DNA, for 18 cycles with a final extension at 72 °C for up to 20 min. The inlet plasmid DNA was digested with Donel (NEB, R0176) for 3 h at 37 °C (in the thermal cycler. PCR products were purified over spin columns in PB/QG buffer and transformed into XL-1 blue cells and processed as described above. The resulting constructs were sequenced (Genewitz). To obtain constructs with multiple mutations, nucleotide changes were introduced sequentially. The same procedure was applied to generate the GFP-PIC1 LG/AAA PZD domain mutant construct and the GFP-PTEN G251C mutant construct (for oligonucleotides see Table S6).

42&gt;283&gt;451&gt;476&gt;For transient expression experiments in HEK cells, including all immunoprecipitation experiments, GFP fusion constructs were established in pEGFP vector (Clontech). For the GFP-GIPC1 expression constructs, the cDNA for human GIPC1 (PlasmidID Harvard, HsCD00040225) was inserted into pEGFP-C1 (Clontech) using XHO and EcoRI (NEB). For pEGFP-N1 Dn2-GFP human Dn2 (Srinivasan et al., 2018) was inserted using EcoRI and KpnI restriction sites. For pEGFP-N1 CLTC-TD-GFPC, human CLTC terminal domain (TD) the N-terminal 579 amino acids of human CLTC (plasmid Harvard: HSCD0033948) were amplified by PCR and subcon1ed with Xhol and HindIII (NEB, R0104). For pEGFP-C1 NRP13 cytoplasmic tail constructs the 44 C-terminal amino acid cytoplasmic portion of human NRP1 (Thermo, Ultimate ORF, clone IOH481223) were inserted using Xhol and EcoRI (both NEB) in frame with GFP. For the dSEA mutant, the last three amino acids were omitted. For all 14-3-GFP isoform fusion constructs PCR products were subcloned into pEGFP-N1 as described above (for cDNA see Table S7, for oligonucleotides and restriction enzymes see Table S6). For biochemistry experiments FLAG-tag and influenza virus hermaphaga antigen (HUHAG) were first introduced in pcDNA 3.1. 3 vector. In brief, two overlapping oligonucleotides were annealed and expanded using PFU Ultra DNA polymerase (for Oligonucleotides see supplementary Table S6), agarose gel purified and extracted (small DNA extraction kit, IBI Scientific, IB47061), digested with HindIII and KpnI (NEB) and ligated into pcDNA 3.1 as described above. Next, cDNAs (all human) for SH3BP4, GIPC1, GIPC2 (Thermo Ultimate ORF, IOH27252), EPS15 (Thermo, IOH46773), YWHAE (PlasmidID Harvard, HsCD0005020) were inserted in frame with FLAG-HA tags into the pcDNA 3.1 FLAG-HA construct as described above, for oligonucleotides and restriction enzymes, see Table S6. For human GIPC3 continuous cDNA could not be obtained, two independent clones (Dharmacon, MHS6278-21168773, clone ID: 40125863) exhibited approximately 20 bp deletion in the GC 5' part. Instead, for the 5' 240 bp region, single-stranded DNA designed with reduced GC content in the 5' 114 bp and 30 bp for DNA assembly was ordered (gblock, IDT DNA, see Table S6). The remaining part was amplified with 30 bp overhangs and assembled by homologous recombination in yeast as described below and the resulting construct was verified by Sanger sequencing (Genewitz). For transient overexpression of Akt1-wt-HA, DNA was amplified (DNA from 896 pcDNA3 T7 Akt1 was a gift from William Sellers, Addgene plasmid # 9003; http://n2t.net/addgene:9003; RRID:Addgene\_9003) with a reverse primer to insert a HA tag and subcloned into pcDNA 3.1 using EcoRI and Xhol (NEB) as described above. To establish stable expression of SH3BP4-FGP-fusion in human cells, constructs were subcloned into the PLVX lentiviral vector (Clontech, neo: Cat# 632181, puro: 632183) where expression is driven by human cytomegalovirus immediate early promoter (hCMV) and neomycin or purycomin resistance genes follow after an internal ribosomal entry site. For subcloning SnaBI (NEB, R0130) and Not-HF (NEB, R3189) were used. The same approach was used for Dyn2-GFP, Eps15-GFP, Eps15SNAP, GFP-NRP1, cytosolic GFP, GAP-GFP, GFP-PTEN, SNAPI-PTEN and constitutively active Akt1-SNAP expression. To assemble the SNAP-PTEN and Eps15-SNAP constructs, the SNAPI-tag was amplified from pSNAP-f (NEB, N9183S). For the TIRF

422&gt;43&gt;458&gt;52&gt;Article

47&gt;64&gt;458&gt;204&gt;clathrin coated pit localization assay a membrane targeted GFP was designed as a negative control. To localize GFP to the plasma membrane the first 20 amino acids of neuroglubin/GAP43 were introduced into pEGFP-N1 in frame with GFP. The N-terminal peptide was previously found sufficient for membrane and Golgi targeting (Liu et al., 1994). The peptide is palmitoylated at Cys3 and Cys4 and anchored to the lipid bilayer (Skeene and Virag, 1989). For rescue experiments in the RPE GIPC1 knockout cells an N-terminally 10x Histidine tagged -(HIS)-GIPC1 was generated by using oligonucleotides encoding the His-tag for PCR and subcloning the product into pLVX puro with EcoRI and Xtal (NEB). To rescue NRP1 function in the RPE NRP1 KO cells, a lentirval GFP-NRP1 full-length fusion constructs was assembled in yeast by homologous recombination as described below. The NRP1 N-terminal 21 amino acid signal peptide was followed by GFP, which in turn was spaced from NRP1 by a six amino acid glycine-serine linker (GGGSG5). The three pieces (for oligonucleotides see Table S6) were assembled in pRS424 shuttle vector by homologous recombination in yeast as described below. The resulting fusion piece was transferred to pLVX puro lentirval vector for stable expression. After infection, RPE cells were sorted flow-analyzed by western blotting (see below). To enhance Akt1, a membrane targeted constitutively active version was amplified by PCR (1017 pDNA3 My Akt1 deltaPH was a gift from William Sellers, Adgene plasmid # 0099; http://n2t.net/adgene.9009; RRIDAdgene,9009) and introduced into pEGFP-N1. Next, the GFP fusion construct was subjected cloned into pLVX-puro as described above. For pEGFP-N1 GIPC1 GFP constructs, EcoRI and BamHI sites were used. For expression of the GFP-PTEN fusion, the PTEN CDNA (Thermo, IOH56926) was amplified using primers with Xhol and BamHI restriction sites and inserted into pEGFP-C1 as described above. Subsequently, the GFP-PTEN insert was subcloned into pLVX puro. For expression of recombinant GST-SH3BP4-HIS8x in Ecoli, where SH3BP4 is GST-tagged at the N-term and contains an 8x histidine tag at the C-term, oligonucleotides introducing restriction sites and His-tag were used and the PCR product was introduced into pGEX-6-P1 (GE Healthcare) with EcoRI and NotI (NEB). The analogous strategy was employed to generate a pGE6-P1-GST-GIPC1-HIS8x expression vector.

47&gt;204&gt;458&gt;343&gt;The constructs for GIPC3, SP-HIS68-SEMA, EPs15-SNAP, constitutively active Akt1-SNAP, SNAP-TEN and the SH3BP4 R18 mutant constructs were assembled by homologous recombination in yeast S.cerevisiae. To this end, oligonucleotides with 30 bp overhangs were designed and DNA fragments were amplified by PCR and purified on agarose gels as described above. The pRS424 plasmid DNA containing the TRP1 marker (Christenson et al., 1992) was digested with KpnI-HF, NotI-HF and Smal (NEB, R0141) for linearization and purified by agarose gel electrophoresis and gel extraction. For transformation, linear pRS424 and the DNA fragments were mixed with 260 µL polyethylene glycol (PEG, average M, 4000, Sigma, 811240) and 50 % w/v in sterile water), 36 µL 1 M lithium-acetated in (water, Sigma, 5179926) salmon sperm DNA carrier (Invitrogen, 15632-011) and competent yeast VYPH500 (Cermak et al., 2011), that were prepared according to established protocols (Gietz and Schiesti, 2007). Cells were incubated for 22 min at 42 °C in the water bath, spun down, and plated on tryptophan deficient yeast synthetic drop out plates. Synthetic drop out plates were prepared from 6.7 g Yeast Nitrogen Base (w/o amino acids, Difco, Becton Dickinson, 20191940), 2 g of amino acid mix without Tryptophan (manually mixed, all amino acids were obtained from Sigma), 15 g agar (bacteriological type A, Affymetrix, 10906), 2 % D-glucose (Dextrose, Fisher Scientific, D16). Plates were incubated at 30 °C until colonies formed. To obtain plasmid DNA, cells were harvested from plates, digested with zymolase and extracted according to manufacturers' instructions (Zymoprep Yeast Plasmid Miniprep II, Zyme Research, D2004). The eluted plasmid DNA was transformed into XL-1-blue competent cells (NEB) and grown on ampicillin (100 µg/ml, Sigma, A-9518) selective LB-agar plates. Colonies were expanded, plasmid DNA was extracted and analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion and Sanger sequencing as described above. To obtain an SH3BP4 mutant that mimics S246 phosphorylation and 14-3-binding, the 20 amino acid long 14-3-binding peptide R18 (Wang et al., 1999) was introduced upstream of the last NPF motif and the S246 phosphorylation site. It replaced an un-conserved region of SH3BP4 with considerable amino acid sequence heterogeneity. As a negative control the double lysine mutant version of the R18 peptide was used (Wang et al., 1999).

47&gt;357&gt;458&gt;412&gt;One million H157, HCC193 and H1819 NSCLC cells were harvested by trypsinization and mRNA was extracted using the RNAEasy mini kit (Qiagen, 74106) following the manufacturer's instructions. The cDNA was generated using SuperScript IV (Thermo Scientific, 18091050). In brief, 1 mg mRNA, oligo-d18 (Primer, NEB, S1315S) and dNTPs (Bio Ras) were heated to 65 °C for 5 min and annealed on ice for 3 min. SuperScript IV master mix was added and the reverse transcriptase reaction was run for 10 min at 52C before the enzyme was inactive at 80 °C for 10 min. The PTEN cDNA was amplified by PCR yielding a 1.2 kb product (Figure S8C, for oligonucleotides see Table S6) on a 1 % agarose gel. The band was extracted and purified as described above and processed for Sanger sequencing (Genewitz, for oligonucleotides used for PTEN sequencing see Table S6). For 4157 the G251C mutation was confirmed while for HCC193 and H1819 cells no mutations were found in PTEN.

47&gt;426&gt;458&gt;463&gt;To assess the effect of clathrin mediated endocytosis on neuroprolin-1 and α -5-integrin endocytosis a knockdown of clathrin heavy chain was performed. To this end 120 k wild type RPE cells were seeded in 6 well plates. The following day cells were transfected with 30 pmol each of two siRNAs targeting clathrin heavy chain (CHC, Sigma, see Table S8 for sequences) or equivalent amounts of AllStars negative control siRNA (Qiagen, 1027281) using Lipofectamine RNAMAX (Thermo, 13778-150) in Opti-MEM medium (Gibco, 31985-070) as recommended by the manufacturer. The transfection was repeated on day 2. On day 3, 10 K cells were seeded for the

42&gt;64&gt;451&gt;84&gt;uptake and SEMA3A assays and starved overnight in low glucose serum free medium as described below. The assays were performed on day four post seeding as described below. Cells were harvested for knockdown analysis by western blotting as described below.

42&gt;99&gt;451&gt;299&gt;For CRISPR/Cas9 experiments, 200-500 bp of the first or second exon were used to find optimal guide-RNA targeting sequences on the web site of the Zhang lab at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT, www.crispr.mit.edu (Ran et al., 2013)) or optimal targeting sequences were retrieved from the Lum lab at UT Southwestern Medical Center website (www.crispinator.com (Tuladhar et al., 2019)). Oligonucleotides (LDT DNA) with overhangs compatible with Bbsl restriction enzyme were designed for insertion into pX458 pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (Cas9 wt) or pSpCAS9(BNB)-2A-puRO (Cas9 nickname, Addgene # 48138, 484139, respectively, the plasmids were a gift from Feng Zhang, MIT), as described in detail (Ran et al., 2013) (for oligonucleotide see Table S6). In brief, forward and reverse oligonucleotides were mixed and phosphorylated with T4 polynucleotide kinase (T4 PKN, M0201, NEB) for 30 min at 37 °C in T4 ligase buffer (NEB, M0202). For duplex formation, the reaction mix was heated to 95 °C for min and slowly cooled down to room temperature in the thermal cycler (Baid-Rad). The pSpCas9 vectors were digested with Bbsl-Hf (NEB, R3539). depthphotosylated with CIP, purified on a 1 % agarose gel and extracted from the gel using extraction procedures and spin columns as described above. The oligonucleotide duplexes and digested pSpCas9 were ligated with T4 DNA ligase as described and unligated linear DNA was digested by addition of Plasmid Safe ATP dependent Nuclease (Epicene, E3101K), 0.5 mM ATP (Biobasic, AB0311) and 1x plasmid safe nuclease buffer (Epicenter) for 30 min at 37 °C and heat inactivated at 70 °C for 10 min. Reaction products were transformed into XL-1-blue as described above. Resulting clones were analyzed by Sanger sequencing (Gewiz). Plasmid DNA was prepared using silica-based spin columns (Econo-Spin, Epoch Life science, 2040) according to standard protocols. For gene targeting cells were transfected by electroporation using the NEON system (Thermo Scientific, KP5000). Cell cells were washed once with phosphate buffered saline PBS), incubated with 0.5 % trypsin-EDTA solution (GBICO, 15400-054) until they detached, collected in culture medium and harvested by centrifugation. Cells were washed once with PBS and resuspended at 5'10% cells/ml. To each 100 µl of cell suspension, 8 µg Cas9-wt plasmid DNA was added. For Cas9-nickase, the cell suspension was mixed with 0.1 µg/ 100 µl pEGF-CP-1 (Clonecth) plasmid as a transfection marker. Sequentially, multiple volumes of 100 µl of cell suspension were pulsed twice at 1400 V for 20 ms and resuspended in culture medium. The next day, the medium was refreshed, and cells were expanded for fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). For single cell sorting, cell sorting were detached with tpisin\_harvested in culture medium, washed once with PBS, resuspended in PBS and cell aggregates were removed by subjecting the suspension to a 40 µ m nylon cell strainer (Falcon, 353240). For single cell sorting, 96 well plates (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, Spectra Plate-96 TC, 6005650) were coated with gelatin solution (Attachment Factor, Gibco, S-060-100) for 30 min at 37 °C. Next, single GFP positive cells were sorted into 96 well plates on a FACS Aria II SORP flow cytometry (BDS Bioclements, UT Southwestern Children's Medical Center Research Institute Moody Foundation Flow Cytometry facility) using the 488 nm laser settings. Cell colonies were inspected on an inverted microscope (Nikon, Eclipse TS100) with a 4x objective (Nikon, Plan Fluor 4x, NA 0.13) and expanded. Protein expression was assessed by western blotting as described below.

42&gt;316&gt;451&gt;406&gt;In RPE SH3BP4 knockout cells, expression was reconstituted by SH3BP4-GFP fusion proteins. To establish stable expression of SH3BP4-GFP wt and mutant fusion constructs and expression of Eps15-GFP, Dyn2-GFP, GFP-NRP1 fluorescent reporter constructs in human cells a lentiviral transduction system was used. To this end, pLVX based constructs were transfected into HEK 293T cells together with packaging vectors pSpAX (H/1-vag and pol) and pMD2. GV (SV-G, both plasmids obtained from Addgene, #12260 and #12259, respectively), plasmids were a gift from Didenro, EPortL, Lausanne, Switzerland. For HEK cell transfection, standard polyethyleneimine (PEI, linear, MW 25 K, Polysciences, 23966) protocols were used. In brief, 30 µl PEI (1 mg/ml in H$\_{2}$O, pH 7.0) and 10 µg plasmid DNA each in 0.5 ml serum free DEMM medium were mixed and incubated for 15 min at room temperature before the transfection mix was added to the cells. Virus was harvested two days post transfection and filtered through 0.45 µ m mixed cellulose esters membrane syringe filters (Fisher Scientific, MC9-02-7005) and added to the cells. The next day the medium was exchanged, and cells were selected with pyromucicin dihydrochloride (Gibco, A1113802) or Geneticin (G418 sulfate, Gibco, 10131-035) or left unselected. After a couple of days of expansion, fluorescent cells were sorted on a FACS Aria II SORP flow cytometer equipped with a 488 nm and 633 nm laser (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and expanded for analysis. Cells were further characterized by western blotting and microscopy as described below.

42&gt;421&gt;451&gt;478&gt;For expression and purification of active human semaphrin-3a protein (SEMA3A, cDNA from Dharmacon, 40034963), a histidine tag (HIS6x) was introduced at the N-term of the mature protein in frame with the signal peptide. To obtain higher yields of uncleaved protein a furin protease cleavage site was removed by introducing the R551A, R555A mutations (RRAA) (Adams et al., 1997) with overlapping primers by DNA assembly in yeast as described below (for oligonucleotides see Table S6). The His-tag semaphrin-3a fusion was subcloned into the shuttle vector pAd-tET-T37 using Hindilli (NEB, R0104) and Noti-HF. The pAd-tET-T37 is a modification of pAdox (Hardy et al., 1997) where the CMV promoter was replaced with a tetracycline responsive promoter as described previously (Atschuler et al., 1996). It contains a V$\_{P}$ packaging sequence, a single loxP site for cre recombination, a multiple cloning site followed by a poly-adenylation signal. Helper Adenovirus DNA was purified as described (Hardy et al., 1997). HEK 293 Cre-4 (Merck) that

421&gt;44&gt;457&gt;52&gt;Article

49&gt;65&gt;457&gt;98&gt;express Cre-recombinance, were transfected with purified helper adenovirus DNA and pAd-tET-T3T7-HIS6-SEMA3A plasmid using established calcium-phosphate protocols. After cytopathic effects appeared, virus was extracted using three freeze-thaw cycles and passed aged one more round on Cre-4 cells followed by a third passage on regular HEK 293T cells to achieve high titer virus (P3 virus) (Hardy et al., 1997). Virus was extracted by three freeze thaw cycles, cell debris was spun down and supernatant was harvested, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.

49&gt;113&gt;457&gt;344&gt;For sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) 1 mm thick gels were manually casted using the miniprotean system (Bio-Rad, 1658001FC) using standard protocols. In brief, the separation gel contained 375 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 10 % acrylamide (from 40 % Acrylamide/Bis Solution, 37.5:1, Bio-Rad, 1610148), 0.1 % SDS (Thermo Scientific, 28365), and polymerization was catalyzed. Stacking gels were made of 5 % acrylamide, 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, and ammonium sulfate (Thermo Scientific, 17874). Stacking gels were made of 5 % acrylamide, 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, and were polymerized as for the separation gels. Gels contained 10 or 15 wells, depending on the number of samples. Samples were run at 100 V for at least 90 min or until appropriate protein separation was observed (Power Pac Basic, Bio-Rad, 1645050). Gels were run in electrode buffer that contained 25 mM Tris, 190 mM glycine (Fisher Scientific, BP381-5) and 0.1 % SDS. Proteins were transferred to methanol (Pharmco-Aaper, 339000000CSG) activated PVDF membranes (0.45 μ m, Thermo Scientific, 88518), packed between Wthatman paper (3MM-CHR GE Healthcare, 3030-917) in transfer buffer containing 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine (Fisher Scientific, BP381) and 10 % ethanol for 1 h at 400 mAmp in 4 ° C. Subsequently, membranes were blocked in Tris buffered saline with tin (TBST) composed of 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris, 2.7 mM KCl, adjusted to pH7.4, 0.05 % Tween-20 (Fisher Scientific, BP337), containing 10 % milk. For protein detection, antibodiespecific to SH3BP4 (mouse, Santa Cruz Biotechnology (SCBT), sc393730), SH3BP4 (mouse, 2992C1a, Abcam, abb, A853J), GIPC (rabbit, Protein, 1482-1, APR1-1, propellant-1, Abbacam, abb, A853J, 121-1, APR1-1, propionil-1, 4-3-c-m, mouse, 8C3, SCBT, sc23957), myosin-6 (rabbit, SCBT, H-215, sc50461), ARHF61E2 (larg Lab (arbit, H-70, SCBT, sc25638), 25-integrin (rabbit, EP87R54, Abcam, abb, 150361), Akt (pan, rabbit, C677E, Cell Signaling Technology (CST), 4691), phospho-Asc MitF347 (pS473, rabbit, D9E, CST, 4060), phospho-Akt Thr308 (rabbit, C315EE, CST, 2965), actin (mouse, Sigma, AC-15, A1978), dynamin-2 (goat, SCBT, sc4600), Eps1 (rabbit, Schmid laboratory, UTSW), vimentin (mouse, V9, Sigma, V6630), vimentin (rabbit, SCBT, C-20, sc5755), SNAP tag (rabbit, NEP, P9310), semaphorn-3 (rabbit, Abb, Abb, 22339), green fluorescent protein, GFP (mouse, Roche, 11814460001), influenza virus hemagglutinin (tag, Rabbit, Sigma, SAB4300603), penta-histidine tag (mouse, Oiaogen, 346600), PTEN (rabbit, CST, D4.3, 9188), E-cadhernin (rabbit, CST, 24E10, 3195), GAPDH (rabbit, CST, D16H11, 5174), clathrin heavy chain (mouse, manufactured by BioXCell, Lebanon, NH, clone TD.1) were used (see Table S6 for all antibodies used and corresponding research resource ID, RFID). Membranes were incubated with antibodies in TBST containing 5 % milk or 5 % bovine serum albumin (BSA, Equitech-Bio, BAR565-HW over night at 4 ° C, rocking membranes were washed three times for at least 20 min in TBST and incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase, goat anti mouse (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, 115-035-003) goat anti rabbit (Jackson, 111-035-003) and donkey anti goat (Abcam, abb.97110) for 1 h at room temperature before membranes were washed again three times with TBST. Membranes were incubated in custom made enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) solution containing 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 2.5 mM p-Coumaric acid (Sigma, C9008), 1.2 mM Luminol (Sigma, A8511), 0.01 % H$\_{2}$O$\_{2}$ (Alfa Aesar, L14000), or for weak signals with SuperSignal West Femto (Thermo Scientific, 34095) and imaged on a GBOX imaging system (Sygene, as described above). For image inversion, cropping, and intensity adjustments, Fij/ImageJ (1.53c and earlier versions, NIH) software was used (Schindelstein et al., 2012). Protein band intensities were quantified with Image studio light (Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE) software, statistical analysis rank sum test or Student's t test was used and plotting of summary data was done in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, M2, R018a).

49&gt;344&gt;457&gt;393&gt;To assess protein expression in non-small cell lung cancer cells, 3 million cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes and harvested the next day using cell scrapers as described above. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 50 mM Tris (Fisher Scientific), pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl (RPI), 0.5 % NP40 (Fluka) and HALT Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, 1861281). Samples were processed for western blotting and analysis as described above. Each blot contained a control lysate from RPW et cells for normalization across all cell lines and all experimental repeats. The protein band intensities were normalized with actin or GAPDH loading controls and then normalized with the RPE sample. The phospho-Akt pS573 band intensities were additionally normalized with total Akt. Experiments were repeated at least five times, and mean +/- standard error (SEM) are shown.

49&gt;406&gt;457&gt;477&gt;For purification of HiS6-SEMA3A (RAA), confluent dishes of HEK 293T were infected with adenovirus expressing semaphorin-3a and tTA helper virus (see above) and the medium was harvested the next day. To prevent unspecific protein binding to the Ni-NTA resin (Invitrogen, R901-15), the NaCl concentration was adjusted to 500 mM and 10 mM imidazole (Acros organics, 12202) were added, together with 1 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride to reduce proteolysis (PMSF, Sigma, 517992). The protein was bound to Ni-NTA agarose overnight, rocking at 4 ° C. The beads were harvested, applied to a Poly-prep chromatography column (BioRad, 731-1550) and washed at 4 ° C with PBS containing 500 mM NaCl and 25 mM Imidazole. The HS6-SEMA3A was eluted with increasing concentrations of imidazole and 500ul fractions were collected. For analysis, 16 µl of the samples were mixed with 6x sample buffer containing 375 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 9 % Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Thermo Scientific, 28365), 50 % Glycerol (Fisher Scientific, BP229) and 0.03 % Bromophenol blue (Bio-Rad, 161-0404) under non-reducing condition to preserve semaphorin-3a dimers. The samples were heated for 5 min at 95 ° C and analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as described

42&gt;63&gt;451&gt;98&gt;above. Gels were stained with Aquastain blue (Bulldog Bio, AS00100) and destained in tap water and the fractions containing SEMA3A were pooled and dialyzed three times in PBS for 30 min at 4 °C each using Slide-A-hyzer dialysis cassettes (10 kDa cutoff, Thermo, 66380). The protein was collected, protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, 23225) and a microplate reader (Synergy-H1, BioTek, Winooski, VT). The protein concentration was adjusted, samples were aliquoted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use.

42&gt;99&gt;451&gt;225&gt;For expression of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins for SH3BP4 and GIPC1 the corresponding pGEX-6P-1 constructs were transformed into BL21 cells (DE3, NEB, C2527) as described above. Small cultures were grown in LB medium rocking overnight at 37 °C. Large cultures were started and OD600 was observed regularly and when it reached 0.8-1, protein expression was induced with 1 mM Isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactoside (IPTG, Goldbio, l2481), and cultures were grown overnight at 22 °C. Cells were harvested and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. Next, cells were resuspended in ice cold PBS containing 1 mM PMSF, oComplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), Goldbio, 1% Triton-X100 (Fisher Scientific, BP151). Cells were sonicated at 40 % amplitude for 3 times 10 seconds (Fisher Scientific, model F505) at 4 °C and rocked in the cold for 10 min to solubilize proteins. Lysates were spun at 12°000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C (Beckman Coulter) and supernatants were harvested. Glutathione-agarose (ABT, 4B-GLU-100) was washed with PBS, added to the cell lysates and rocked overnight at 4 °C. Next, the beads were washed three times in PBS at 4 °C and eluted with 5 mM reduced L-glutathione (Sigma, G4251) in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. The eluted proteins were analyzed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Coomassie staining as described above. As a second purification step, NaCl concentration was adjusted to 500 mM, 10 mM imidazole, and Ndi-NTA-resin were added and bound over night, rocking at 4 °C. The next day, the resin was collected on a column, washed, and eluted as described above. Then, eluted GST-GIPC1-HIS8x fractions were pooled and dialyzed in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol for three times 20 min at 4 °C. Next, the protein was digested with precision protease (GE life sciences, 27084301) at 4 °C overnight. To sequester the protease and cleaved GST, the protein solution was incubated with glutathione-agarose as described above and the supernatant was collected. The GIPC1-HIS8x was rebound to Nl-NTA resin, eluted in a small volume, analyzed, and precipitation and absorbed until use.

42&gt;239&gt;451&gt;391&gt;For protein-protein interaction studies by immunoprecipitation (IP), unless stated otherwise, HEK cells were used. Cells were transfected with plasmids encoding GFP and HA-tagged fusion constructs using PEI methods as described above. For experiments involving overexpression of Akt1-wt-HA kinase constructs, cells were starved for 12 h in serum free low glucose DMEM (Gibco, 11885-084, 1 g/L D-Glucose), containing AA. The next day, cells were washed once with PBS, harvested with cell culture spatulas (Techno Plastic Products, TPP, 99010) on ice, spun down in a table top centrifugate at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and 1 ml lysist buffer containing 50 mM Tris (Fisher Scientific), pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl (RPC1), 0.5 % NP40 (Fluhao and Complete protease inhibitor cockroach (Roche, l16974809) and phosphatase inhibitors Sodium fluoride (1 mM, Fisher Scientific, S410) Sodium orthovarianate (1 mM, Fisher Scientific, S454), Sodium pyrophosphate dehydrate (1 mM, Sigma, 221368), β -Glycrophosphate disodium salt hydrate (1 mM, Sigma, G5422) were added. Cells were sonicated once for 10 seconds at 20 % amplitude (Fisher Scientific) and further incubated at 4 °C rotating for 30 min. Samples were spun down at maximum speed at 4 °C and supernatant was collected. Protein-G-agarose (ABT, 4RRPG-5) was washed with lysist buffer once and spun down. To each sample 0.8 µg of mouse anti-GFP antibody (Roche, 11814460001) and 30 µl of protein-G-agarose beads were added and samples were incubated at 4 °C rotating overnight. Beads were harvested by centrifugation at 700rpm and 4 °C, washed three times with lysis buffer and resuspended in 6x sample buffer as described above containing 10 % β -mercaptoethanol (BME, Fisher Scientific, BP176) and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Both the immunoprecipitation and supernatant control samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and western blotting as described above. For the supernatant 1/50°C of the sample was loaded. Protein bands intensities for bait and prey were quantified with Image studio light (Li-cor) and results were normalized with the signal from the GFP-fusion protein. The data were analyzed and plotted with Matlab. For experiments with five or more repeats, the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon rank sum test was used for statistical analysis. For experiments with three or four repeats Student's t test was used for statistical analysis. For immunoprecipitation experiments with three or more repeats, three independent experiments were performed on independent days. For experiments with more than three repeats, multiple repeats per day were included.

42&gt;384&gt;451&gt;427&gt;To test in-vitro binding of recombinant full-length GST-SH3BP4-HIS8x and GIPC1-HIS8x, purified GST and GST-SH3BP4-HIS8x were re-bound to glutathione-agarose in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, protease inhibitor cocktail (HALT cocktail, Thermo Scientific, 78442), 5 mM DTT, in the presence of GIPC1-HIS8x over night at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected and the beads were washed 3 times with binding buffer. Next, the beads were boiled for 5 min in 6x sample buffer with 10 % BME and loaded for polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis as described above. Both pellet and supernatant fractions were analyzed by Coomassie staining (Buildog Bio) and western blotting.

42&gt;440&gt;451&gt;476&gt;To identify SH3BP4 binding partners, FLAG-influenza-virus hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged SH3BP4 was overexpressed in HEK cells using standard Calcium phosphate and polyethyleneimine (PEI) methods as described above. Cells were harvested the next day and washed once with ice-cold PBS. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, protease inhibitor cocktail as described above at 4 °C for at least 30 min. Lysates were sonicated for three times 10 seconds at 20 % amplitude and lysates were pelleted. Supernatants were recovered and cleared through spin filters (0.45 µM pore size, PVDF, Millipore

419&gt;43&gt;458&gt;52&gt;Article

49&gt;65&gt;458&gt;126&gt;#UFC40HV00) at 3000 g for 1 min at 4 ° C. Filtred cell lysates were pooled and mouse anti-HA tag antibody coated agarose beads were added (Sigma, #A2095) and incubated overnight rotating at 4 ° C. Then samples were washed seven times with lysis buffer and five more times with cold PBS. Proteins were eluted with 250 µ g/ml HA peptide in PBS (Sigma, t2149) for three times. From the pooled eluted protein, 10 % were subjected to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and silver staining (Thermo scientific, 24612) to verify expression and pull-down of the protein of interest. Peptides were then precipitated with 20 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) Sigma on ice for 30 min. Samples were spun in a tabletop centrifuge (Eppendorf) at max speed for 25 min at 4 ° C. Next, pellets were washed once with 10 % TCA and spun down again. The samples were three rounds with 1 ml of -20 ° C cold acetone (Sigma) and spun for 25 min at 4 ° C. The supernatant was aspirated and samples were air dried at room temperature and frozen at -80 ° C until use for mass spectrometry analysis.

49&gt;127&gt;458&gt;282&gt;For phosphoprotein analysis, FLAG-HA-SH3BP4 was expressed as described above and cells were harvested in lysis buffer containing phosphatase inhibitors 1 mM Sodium orthovorandavamt 1 mM Sodium orthovorandavamt 1 mM Sodium phosphate dehydratase 1 mM B -glyc- erophosphate disodium salt hydrate as outlined above. After peptide elution samples were boiled 5 min with corresponding volume of 6x sample buffer (with BME) loaded for PAGE. The gel was stained using Coomassie stain and destain solutions (Bio-Rad, 1610435) and washed in water. The stained SH3BP4 band was cut and excised gel bands were reduced into approximately 1 mm 3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/ml modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4 ° C. After 45 min, the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37 ° C room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50 % acetonitrile and 1 % formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~ 1 h). The samples were stored at 4 ° C until analysis. On the day of analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 5-10 µ l of HPLC solvent acetic (2.5 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µ m C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µ m inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng and Gyg, 2001). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (7.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % 3% formic acid). As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTO Orbitrav ProJs Ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)(Eng et al., 1994). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data were filtered to between a one and two percent false discovery rate.

49&gt;282&gt;458&gt;336&gt;To remove contaminating false positive proteins, control samples were generated. The pDNA FLAG-HA-Empty vector was expressed in HEK cells and samples were processed the same way as described above for SH3BP4. The experiment was repeated twice and the resulting list of recurrent contaminants was subtracted from the data. Next, proteins were included in the final list that exhibited at least three peptides in three independent experiments (see Table S5). For Figure 4A only proteins identified with at least ten peptides in each of three independent experiments were displayed to enhance readability of the figure. Phospho-peptides were evaluated using the Ascor algorithm where localization was considered confidently assigned with scores above 19 (Beausoleil et al., 2006). Listed are all phosphorylated SH3BP4 peptides that were detected in four independent experiments (Lu et al., 2014) (Table S1).

49&gt;337&gt;458&gt;477&gt;To quantify the endocytosis of 25-integrins a cell surface biotinylation and uptake assay was used as previously described (Valdembri et al., 2009). Two million RPE cells were seeded per 10 cm dish and grown overnight as described above. The next day, cells were starved in serum free low glucose DEM medium (Gibco, 11885-084) for 9 h. The conditioned medium was collected and cells were washed once in ice cold PBS and biotin-labeled in 10 ml of PBS containing 0.2 mg/ml EZL silk-to-NHS-SS-biotin (Thermo, 21331) or HOOK-sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (G-Biosciences, BG-09) for 30 min at 4 ° C in the cold room. Cells were washed once with ice cold PBS. The conditioned medium was added back and cells were placed at 37 ° C in a cell culture incubator for receptor internalization. At the indicated timepoints, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS and stored in PBS. Except for the total surface protein control sample, the PBS was removed and non-internalized biotin was cleaved for 1 h at 4 ° C in the cold room by adding 10 ml of cleavage buffer containing 20 mM sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate (Mesna, Sigma, M1511) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (Fisher Scientific, pH 8.6) and 100 mM NCI (RPI). The cleavage reaction was quenched by 400 µ l of 0.5 M iodoacetamide (Sigma, t1149) in PBS for 10 min at 4 ° C. Cells were washed twice in PBS, cells were harvested by scraping and spun down in a top table centrifuge at 4 ° C. Cells were lysed in 1 ml of buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM Sodium Orthovanadate (Fisher Scientific, ICN15966425) and 2 mM MgC12 (Fisher Scientific) for 1 h at 4 ° C. Rotating. Cell lysates were spun down and supernatants were collected. For the western blot analysis of the supernatant, before addition of antibody, 50 µ l of supernatant was collected and stored at 4 ° C. To the remaining cell lysate, for immune-precipitation of 5-integrin, antibodies against total 5-integrin (Biolegend, 328002, NKI-SAM-1, mouse, 2 µ g per sample), inactive 25-integrin (Millipore, MABT822, mAb11, rat, 2 µ g per sample) or active 25-integrin (Millipore, SNAKA15, MABT21, mouse, 4 µ g per sample) and 30 µ l of ProteinG-agarose (ABT) were added and samples were rotated overnight at 4 ° C. The next day, beads were collected and washed three times with lysis buffer. The liquid was removed from the beads and 20 µ l of 6x sample buffer (w/o BME) were added and samples were heated at 95 ° C for 5 min. Samples were loaded on 10 % polyacrylamide gels and blotted on PVDF membrane and blocked

42&gt;63&gt;453&gt;112&gt;in 10 % dry milk solution in TBST as described above. Biotin was probed with streptavidin-POD conjugate (horseradish peroxidase, Roche, 11089153001), at 1:100 dilution in TBST with 5 % milk for 1 h. The blot was washed 3 times in TBST and exposed with Supersignal West femto reagent enhanced chemiluminescence reagent (Thermo Scientific). The band intensities were quantified with Im -age studio light (Li-cor) and results were plotted with a customized script in Matlab. Mean and standard deviations (SD) from at least three experimental repeats are shown. The results from wild type and knockout cells were compared using Student's t test. To assess the protein levels in the immunoprecipate and the supernatant, the blots were probed and processed as described above according to standard western blotting procedures.

42&gt;113&gt;453&gt;175&gt;To assess the effect of semaphorin-3a on Akt phosphorylation, 500 K RPE wt or SH3BP4 KO cells were seeded in 10 cm culture dishes and starved overnight in low glucose serum free medium (Gibco). To the conditioned medium, 10 μ g/ml purified HIS6xSEMA3A was added and incubated for 1 h at 37 $^{·}$C. Cells were washed once with PBS and collected with a cell scraper and spun down in a table top centrifuge. Cells were resuspended in 50 μ l of yl basis buffer with 50 mM Tris (Fisher Scientific), pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl (RPI), 0.5 % NWP (Fluqa) and HALT Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Cell lysates were spun down at top speed and 6x sample buffer containing 10 % BME was added to samples before they were processed for western blotting for Akt phosphorylated at Ser473 (rabbit, D9E, Self Signaling Technology, 4060). Blots were imaged and analyzed as described above using Image studio light (Li-Cor). The pS473 signal was normalized with the total Akt signal. Data are shown as mean and standard error and samples were compared using Student's t test.

42&gt;190&gt;453&gt;322&gt;For total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy experiments where protein targeting to clathrin coated pits (CCPs) was measured, a clathrin light chain-a(Cicla)tdTomato fusion was used as marker for CCPs. Cells were infected with adenovirus express -ting tdTomato-Cicla fusion protein and ITA helper adenovirus as previously described (Hardy et al., 1997, Schuler et al., 1998) 24 h before imaging. Cover glass with custom built chambers for microscopy. For experiments with semaphorin-3a (SEMA3A) treatment, 10 μ g purified HIS6x-SEMA3A was added to 1 ml conditioned medium and cells were imaged during the first hour of treatment. Cells were imaged on a Ti-electriv e inverted microscope with a perfect focus system (Nikon), a TIRF unit (Diskovery, Andor Technology, Concord, MD), an ApoTrif 60x 1.49 NA objective (Nikon) and a 1.8x tube lens yielding 108x total magnification. The microscope contained 488 mm (150 m m), 561 m m (50 m m) and 642 m m (110 m m) solid state lasers, a dichroic filter (GFP/Rhoda -mine-x/cy5 triple laser TIFF, 488/561/642, Chroma, C124324). The ultra-fast emission filter with 50 mM (Diedlastic Scientific Instrumentation, FW-1000), was equipped with emission band pass filters for 525 nm ± 25, 600 nm ± 25, 700 nm ± 37.5 (all Chroma) and images were acquired using a Zyla 4.20-SCMOS camera (Andor) with 6.5 micron pixel size. The system was controlled by Metamorph software (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA). The TIRF angle of the incident laser light was software controlled (Diskovery Control v1.2.0.0, Andor Technology) and set to 80 nm penetration depth. The temperature was maintained at 37 $^{·}$C by a Bold Line Cage incubator (Okolab, Italy). Images were acquired every 2 seconds for 150-211 frames (or 5-7 min total movie duration). For long-term imaging of the effects of SEMA3A on SH3BP4-GFP targeting to CCPs, images were acquired every 10 seconds for 60 min. Imaging was started after the addition of SEMA3A. For analysis of Eps5-1SNAP targeting to CCPs, cells were stained with 3 μ M SNAP-cell647-SiR dye (NEB, S91025) for 20 min at 37 $^{·}$C in the incubator, according to manufacturer's instructions. To remove excess dye, cells were washed three times with PBS and incubated in fresh medium for at least 20 min more prior to imaging to further wash out membrane associated SNAP dye. Cells were then mounted for TIRF imaging as outlined above.

42&gt;323&gt;453&gt;476&gt;For the quantification of protein recruitment to bona-fide CCPs we used the cmeAnalysis software as previously described (Agut et al., 2013, Srivinasan et al., 2018) (software available at https://github.com/DanuserLab/cmeAnalysis ). In brief, significant diffrac -tion limited clathrin structures were detected by a Gaussian-fit approach for each timepoint and structures were linked over time us -ing uTrack (Jaqaman et al., 2008), which is included in cmeAnalysis. The post-processing of the CCP tracks included gap closing, dissection of compound tracks and removal of bright cytoplasmic visitor structures as described (Agut et al., 2013). Next, bona-fide CCPs were selected by manually setting an intensity threshold for the clathrin signal to be reached within the first 6 frames (12 sec -onds) of the CCP lifetime as described (Srinivasan et al., 2018). The threshold was set for the control conditions such that the lifetime distribution peaked around 30-40 seconds and the dominant condition of short-lived structures with lifetimes shorter than 20 sec -onds was eliminated. This reduced the proportion of short lived (10-30 sec) and likely abortive CCPs that likely do not lead to pro -ductive endocytic events. The same intensity threshold was applied to pooled datasets (data acquired on multiple days) and across conditions within one experiment. To measure SH3BP4-GFP signal intensities at CCPs the "master-slave" approach was used as described previously (Agut et al., 2013, Mettlen et al., 2010). Intensities in both channels were corrected by local background values (Agut et al., 2013). This yielded SH3BP4-GFP intensities at individual CCPs along their entire lifetime. CCPs that were significantly SH3BP4-GFP positive in at least one single frame were selected for further analysis. Next, CCPs with similar duration were pooled in lifetime cohorts (Loerke et al., 2011), yielding average intensities per cohort. To facilitate the data interpretation, only the 40-60 sec -ond cohort was printed in the figure panels. Mean and standard error (SEM) are shown for the intensity cohorts. To compare different experimental conditions, mean SH3BP4-GFP intensities for each movie were calculated as described (Srinivasan et al., 2018). Diff -ferences between conditions were assessed by rank-sum tests (see above). For some experiments, the fraction of continuously pos -itive CCPs was analyzed, where the GFP signal was required to be significantly positive in all frames along a CCP track. For both mean GFP intensity and continuously positive CCPs the data from all cohorts were analyzed. In order to benchmark the software, constructs that were not expected to be efficiently targeted to CCPs (cytosGFP, membrane-GFP) were used as negative controls and bona fide CME accessory factors Eps5-GFP and Dyn2-GFP were used as positive controls for CCP targeting. Each experiment

48&gt;64&gt;458&gt;98&gt;was repeated at least three times with approximately 10-20 movies per condition per day, with on average one cell per movie. Data acquired independently on at least three days was pooled for the analysis. This yielded around 30-60 movies per condition. Control data were acquired on all days to account for day-to-day and cell-to-cell variability. Individual CCP intensity traces were plotted from the results generated by cmeAnalysis software as described earlier (Srinivasan et al., 2018). Rank-sum statistical test was used to compare conditions.

48&gt;113&gt;458&gt;259&gt;For the antibody uptake assay, cells were seeded on 18 mm round cover glasses #1.5 (Warner Instruments, CS18R15) and starved overnight in low glucose and serum free DMEM medium (1 g/L D-glucose, Gibco, 11885-084). The next day cells were washed once with PBS containing 1 mM MgCl$\_{2}$ (Fisher Scientific, BP214), 1 mM CaCl$\_{2}$ (Fisher Scientific, BP510) and 0.2 % BSA (PBS3+) and incubated with 50 μ g/ml neutrophil-1 (mouse, BioLegend, 354502) or m-56 integrin (mouse Biology, NK-SAN-M-1, 328002) antibodies in PBS3+ for 10 min in the cold (for neuronil antipbody only, to increase the amount of antibody taken up by the cells) followed by 30 min at 37 $^{·}$C. Cells were put on ice and washed once with PBS3+ followed by three acid washes (200 mM acetic acid, 200 mM NaCl, pH 2.3) and three more washes with PBS3+, all at 4 $^{·}$C. Cells were then fixed in 4 % PFA on ice for 10 min and another 10 min at room temperature. Samples were permeabilized with Triton X-100 and washed as described above and stained with secondary antimouse-AlexaFluor-647 (Thermo Scientific, A31571), phalloidin-AlexaFluor-488 (Thermo), and 4,6-Diamindo-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Sigma, D9542) for 15 min at 4 $^{·}$C. Samples were washed again and mounted in Fluoromount aqueous mounting medium (Sigma, F4680) and dried at room temperature. Stained cells were imaged on an inverted epifluorescent microscope (Nikon, eclipse-Ti-U) equipped with a Plan Apo 100x, N.A. 1.45 objective (Nikon), a Lambda-XL light source and Lambda 10-B smart shutter (both Sutter Instruments), a Zylsca SMCS00 camera (Andor) and controlled by MAA (Nikon) (Eldestin et al., 2010). For each condition 30-35 images were acquired encompassing approximately 1-5 cells. Plated are average values per image (i.e. one datapoint per image). Antibody and DAPI images were segmented using Squash (image suite from the Ivo Zvalbasin lab, MAPI-Dresden, Germany, http://mosaic.mpb-cq-db?q=downloads/Image) (Rizk et al., 2014). The segmentation parameter "regularization" was set to 0.05 for all images and the parameter "minimum object intensity" was set to 0.25 for antibody signal, while it was set to 0.15 for the DAPI signal. The results of the segmentation were analyzed in Matlab, in brief, for each image, the number of cells was determined based on the number of segmented nuclei and the fluorescence intensity from the segmented antibody signal was summed and averaged per cell. For statistical analysis the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon rank sum test was used. The number of experimental repeats is indicated in the figure legend, one data from a representative experiment is shown.

48&gt;260&gt;458&gt;364&gt;To assess the spreading efficiency of RPE cells, 22 mm square 1.5 cover glass (Coming, 2850-22) in 6-well plates were coated with 2 ml of 10 μ g/ml fibroconnectin solution in PBS (Sigma, F1141) for 30 min at 37 $^{·}$C. Cells were seeded at 10 K per well in DMEM with 10 % FBS and AA for 20 min before they were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde (PFA, Sigma, P6148) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were washed and cells permeabilized in PBS containing 0.5 % Triton-X100 (Fisher Scientific, BP151) for 5 min at room temperature. After three additional PBS washes, samples were stained with primary antibodies for paxillin (rabbit, Y113, Abcam, ab32084) and active as-integrin (clone SNAKA51, mouse, Millipore, MAB2012) for 1 h at 4 $^{·}$C in 1 BSA in PBS. The antibody SNAKA51 recognizes the active conformation of 5-integrin (Clark et al., 2005). After washing, cells were incubated with fluorescently tagged secondary antibodies donkey anti-mouse-AlexaFluor-647 (Thermo Scientific, A31571), donkey anti-rabbit-AlexaFluor-568 (Thermo Scientific, A10042) and phalloidin-AlexaFluor-488 (Thermo Scientific, A12381) in 1 % BSA in PBS. Cells were washed, fixed again with 4 % PFA solution, washed again, mounted for TIRF microscopy and imaged as described above. For area measurements, cells were outlined manually in the actin channel using imageJ and data were analyzed with Matlab. Adhesions in the paxillin and active 5-integrin images were segmented using Squash/ImageJ as described above. For the segmentation, the parameter "regularization" was set to 0.05. and "minimum object intensity" was set to 0.25 for both the paxillin and the active-2-x5integrin signal. Experiments were repeated at least three times, data from one representative experiment is shown. For each condition around 30-35 images stacks were acquired, each containing one cell (i.e. one data point representing one cell).

48&gt;365&gt;458&gt;419&gt;To quantify the fibronectin fibrils, RPE and endothelial HEC1 cells were seeded at 10 K cells per 6 well plate on 22 mm square #1.5 cover glass (Corning in full medium for 31 cells. 2 cells were fixed with 4 % PFA (see above) and stained with antibodies against fibronectin (Abcam, ab2413, rabbit) and total a5-integrin (Biolegend, 328002, clone NKI-SAM-1, mouse) for 1 h at 4 $^{·}$C. Cells were washed three times with PBS and stained with fluorescently tagged secondary antibodies donkey anti-mouse-AlexaFluor-647 (Thermo Scientific, A31571) and donkey anti-rabbit-AlexaFluor-568 (Thermo Scientific, A10042) for 15 min at 4 $^{·}$C. Cells were washed three times and post-fixed with 4 % PFA for 10 min before they were washed and mounted for TIRF microscopy. For each condition 50 images with one or more cells were acquired and the cells were manually classified for fibrobinellis, experiments were repeated three times. Data are presented as mean and standard error and conditions were compared using Student's test.

48&gt;420&gt;458&gt;477&gt;To test the role of SH3BPVP in SEMA3A signaling, the SEMA3A cell area contraction assay was adapted from Takahashi et al. (Takahashi et al., 1999). In brief, cells were seeded in 12 well plastic dishes (Falcon, 353225) coated with attachment factor solution (0.1 % gelatin, Gibco, S006100) and serum starved overnight as described above. The next day, 10 μ g/ml purified HIS6X-SEMA3A was added to the conditioned medium and cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 $^{·}$C and fixed with 4 % PFA as described above. Fixed cells were imaged on a Nikon eclipse T100 microscope with a 20% N/A, 0.40 PH1 objective and a Reta3 R3 CCD camera (Qimaging, Surrey, BC, Canada) with 4.54 μ m pixel size, controlled by μ Manager (Nih). For each condition 10-15 images were acquired, each containing approximately 10-20 cells. Cell outlines were manually generated in ImageJ (Nih) and analyzed and plotted in Matlab. For each condition 100 cell outlines were analyzed (i.e. one datapoint representing one cell). The Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon rank sum

43&gt;64&gt;450&gt;77&gt;test was used for statistical analysis. Each experiment was repeated at least three times, data from one representative experiment are shown.

43&gt;92&gt;451&gt;175&gt;For the analysis of integrin cell surface expression, previously published protocols were followed (Bouaouina et al., 2012). Cells were trypsinized and collected in full medium, spun down, and washed once in PBS. Cells were resuspended in PBS and the cell suspension was filtered through 40 μ m nylon cell strainers (Falcon) and counted (Cellometer Auto 1000, Nexcelom). Cells were pelleted again at 200 g for 5 min and resuspended at 6 million cells per ml in Tyrode's buffer composed of 12 mM Sodium Bicarbonate (Fisher Scientific, BP328), 127 mM NaCl (RP), 5 mM KCl (Fisher Scientific, P217), 0.5 mM NaH$\_{2}$PO$\_{4}$ (Fisher Scientific, S397), 1 mM MgCl$\_{2}$ (Fisher Scientific), D-glucose (Fisher Scientific), 10 mM HEPES (Them Fisher Scientific, 15630080). Cells were stained with function blocking at 5-integrin samples where all x5-integrin (Biolegend, 328002, clone NKI-SAM-1 mouse) for 30 min at 30 °C. Cells were washed with 250 μ l of Tyrodes buffer and spun down at 200 g for 5 min. Next, cells were incubated with donkey anti-mouse-AF647 for 15 min at 4 °C, and again washed with Tyrodes buffer and spun down. Cells were resuspended in 1.5 ml ice cold PBS and stored on ice. Cells were analyzed on a LSRForescent (BDS Biosciences) flow cytometer equipped with four lasers (405 nm, 488 nm, 561 nm and 633 nm). For each condition, 5-10 K cells were analyzed. The fluorescent intensities were analyzed using Followo (BD Biosciences). The experiment was repeated four times and mean and standard errors were plotted. Data were analyzed using Student's t-Test.

43&gt;190&gt;451&gt;267&gt;For SH3BP4, NRP1 and TGA5 protein sequence alignment, data were downloaded from ENSEMBL (Cunningham et al., 2019) and the alignment was performed in Matlab using the multialign function (2018a, The Mathworks, Natick, MA). The SH3BP4 domain architecture was adapted from earlier reports (Kokoszyriska et al., 2009) and from information available in the Uniprot database (Uniprot, 2019). For sequence analysis the web-based tools such as Login, Translate and others from Expasy were used (Artimo et al., 2012). For analysis of SH3BP4 phosphorylation sites phosphositePlus was used (Cell Signaling Technology) (Hornbeck et al., 2015). For the analysis of protein-protein interaction data the BioGRID database was consulted (Oughtred et al., 2019). To assess gene expression in the SH3BP4 pathway in lung cancer, the normalized data from the Lung Cancer Explorer database (http://ice. biohpc.swmed.edu/lungcancer/(CaI et al., 2019) was used as described in the previously (Park et al., 2020). The database comprises 20 studies with 3.159 samples from normal and tumor tissue is normalized across all studies. Data for all studies that covered a particular gene were plotted and data are presented as box and whiskers plots where the median is highlighted and the box covers from the 25$^{th}$-75$^{th}$ percentile and the whiskers cover all data except outliers.

43&gt;296&gt;451&gt;350&gt;For the statistical comparison of TIRF-microscopy data, the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon, also known as rank-sum test was used. TIRFmicroscopy, antibody-uptake assay, cell spreading assay and cell area assay data are presented as box and whiskers plots where the median is highlighted and the box covers from the 25$^{th}$-75$^{th}$ percentile and the whiskers cover all data except outliers. For the analysis of immunoprecipitation results the rank-sum test was used when more than five repeats were available, while for experiments with up to four repeats, Student's t test was used. For immunoprecipitation experiments, mean ± standard error (SEM) are shown. For the TIRF microscopy intensity cohort vs time plots, the mean ± standard error of the intensity is shown. For biochemical uptake assays, the mean, and standard deviation (SD) is shown and Student's t test was used. For all panels, the statistical approach is indicated in the figure legends and p value cut offs are indicated: p